Right, who's our first submission?
I am.
And person, let's be in person.
Yes, we know the mother, the step-brother, the whānau, the Treaty of Waitangi.
Not here. Okay, let's go to the Zoom. Do we know if the Zoom's ready?
Are they online?
So, I'll just...
And in a suspicious style.
They're near, they might come back.
Good morning, Marina.
We've got 10 minutes with you, thinking for being available a little bit early,
but looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
So, we've got 10 minutes, as I say.
So, please leave some time for some questions if you can.
Thank you.
Thank you. Sorry, we just got the thing that our internet connection is unstable.
So, let us know. Classic.
Oh, right, okay.
We're select committee, so, yeah.
Thank you. We'll take it away.
Tamanararanga, the Māori data sovereignty network brings to you in the more than
800 Māori researchers, practitioners and entrepreneurs who are passionate about
data and Māori rights.
As a group focused predominantly on advocacy, Tamanararanga is different to
Takahiraranga Charitable Trust, who are party to the Mana Orita Agreement.
However, we support the submission on this bill, made by the Gata Iwi Leaders Group.
Tamanararanga also engages with the Global Indigenous Data Alliance supporting
the realization of global indigenous data rights through the care principles
and supporting UNDRIP and other international and national trees and conventions.
Today, representing Tamanararanga at three members of Te Pākapū,
the Steering Group, Dr Laro Grieves, an associate professor in politics at
Victoria University of Wellington, with expertise in Māori politics,
survey development, quantitative methods in Māori and LGBTQ plus
demography, Dr Logan Hamley, a senior researcher at the Koa Research
Services, a Ngāti Haueti-led research centre,
and Larissa Renfrew, a PhD student at the University of Auckland who has
conducted research related to Māori data sovereignty and ethics,
Māori identity, youth wellbeing, and demography.
Collectively, our group has also used the RDI in research and also been
conducted, consulted by Stats and Zed, about the approach to LGBTQ
post-topics in the census. Tamanararanga's position on this
bill is shaped by our understanding of Māori data as both a strategic
asset and a living talent to Māori. This includes both data produced by
the census or the new proposed approach. Our position
is also formed by the principles of Māori data sovereignty as
foundational to Tamanararanga's advocacy work.
Tamanararanga welcomes the opportunity to submit on this bill and we want to
begin by acknowledging that there are genuine positives in the proposed model.
More frequent data releases will be valuable, the flexibility to tailor
surveys for different sub-populations is promising,
and we commend the focus on meeting the needs of communities, including Iwi Māori,
but we have serious concerns and we believe this legislation is premature.
The move to administrative census removes the enumerated census before we know
the replacement works. Experts across the board have raised
grave concerns about data quality and Statistics New Zealand's own independent
review has indicated that high quality statistics from administrative data
will not be achievable by 2028. For Māori, the stakes are particularly high.
Administrative data is deficit framed, it is collected at the most
vulnerable moments in people's lives and does not tell the full story of
our communities. Critical variables like Māori descent,
Iwi affiliation and Te Reo Māori fluency have no clear plan
still and Māori descent is not just a data question, it
underpins our electoral system and our constitutional arrangements.
There is also a deeper issue of data sovereignty and consent.
This bill expands and links administrative data without free,
prior and informed consent and without adequate Māori governance
and without upholding the Māori agreement.
Aotearoa has the opportunity to build a world-leading trustworthy data system
and this bill as it stands moves us in the wrong direction.
As for our recommendations, we kind of considered
okay so there's been this process, it's been like quite a long
consultation process, a methodological process within Stats NZ
and we can definitely see some flaws in that process
and really want to know like you know what is the best model going forward,
how can we make this work, considering costs, considering the various
issues we've discussed today and that various other speakers will discuss today.
We think that an independent review of the methods, of the governance,
of the decisions made so far is really our recommendation
and making sure that there are reviewers with expertise in Māori data sovereignty,
Māori data governance. We see like a real missed opportunity
here to create like our own model, our own data ecosystem,
not just kind of copying a Nordic model but making something like unique to Aotearoa New Zealand.
That brings in Te Kāhū Rodona's Māori data governance model
which has some great features you know for everyone but would also uphold
sensitivity and do great in terms of building a trustworthy
data system or robust data system, one that just works better for everyone
and ultimately saves a lot of money. We think it's great that the bill
moves towards greater engagement than just every five years with Māori
but the way that administrative data works is the decisions are made
within agencies and made within Stats NZ that need
greater review and greater engagement with Māori because we know
like four populations, some will make a decision that just seems
like a little technical tweak here and there but it can have a lot of
effect on someone's day-to-day life for you know how they interact with
the state and the system. So ultimately we really think that this is like a
missed opportunity to create a great data system that governs
you know our data as New Zealanders and as Māori
as as Tāunga like upholds Māori data sovereignty
governs data as Tāunga but also as a national strategic asset.
So ultimately you know we side with a lot of the experts that are saying
there are great methodological issues but also point to the suite of
governance issues as well with this move away from the
Enumerated Census. Kia ora, thank you for listening.
Good thank you very much. Now I've got a couple of questions so it's free
actually. Camilla Billich first. Kia ora, thank you very much for your
oral submission and your written submission. I note the strong points
you've made around Māori data sovereignty, TTC and also
the member of you but I just wanted to ask in terms of the
if this bill was to go ahead as it's currently outlined
acknowledging those strong points of your submission what
if any issues do you see around the actual
administrative data and how that would lock in terms of its
its falsiveness. Do you have any concerns around
the that that type of result that might come out of
the use of administrative data?
Absolutely. I think it was kind of really well laid out by the independent
review that was done by StatZ that indicated that
we just won't have that high quality administrative data by 2028 so if this
does roll out there are going to be major gaps and those gaps are going to
cause a lot of harmful Māori. Māori descent you know that's
something that our electoral system is based on you know is
it's one of the lowest quality indicators of the lowest
rate of coverage and for us as analysts like as scientists like
the first thing you do with a new method is you make sure it is super robust
and you know there's always going to be no sayings but you want it to be pretty
good that this you know protects around the edges but people think it's
robust before you bring something counts in and for Māori descent in
particular that's not the case. All right I've got a question from Mr Todd
Mine's kind of a supplementary I think to Camilla's because I was looking at
paragraph 36 of your submission where you talk about
some of you have obviously used the IDI and you were disappointed with the
quality and breadth of the data you've got a couple of examples of what you'd
mean by that. So basically when you go to the
IDI you think okay you're going to have millions and millions of cases
of potential you know normally I do surveys so you're like wow
then equals four million excellent the problem you then have is that these
data were collected like when people are say like
getting arrested or they're collected when someone's in hospital so there's all
sorts of very strange kind of patterns in the data like missing data where you
wouldn't expect it places where like people's ethnicity changes like over
just over data sets at any given snapshot in time so there's a lot of
issues and I'd say at the moment you know my big time reading is war green
and war green registered by statistics and I would recommend it to the select
committee it's an excellent book that stats NZ have said they based
this approach on the Nordic model they patched all of that and made sure that
there weren't issues across data sets before they
implemented an administrative census so that's what we could say is that you
need to make sure that you don't have these gaps or this
weird inconsistency in the data and that you have a very clear
transparent or a bust approach to where there are inconsistencies
especially for things like the Maori descent indicator.
Thanks. All right hey thank you very much for your submission that's been very
helpful and very comprehensive for your
submission so thank you for this morning.
Right now we're going into the next one community housing out here
Good morning.
Nice to see you. Are you on your own this morning?
I believe Paul will be joining me but I will have him kick off.
I'm the deputy CEO with community housing
and thank you for the opportunity to address you this morning.
We won't speak to the points in our submission.
We share concerns about the changes that are taking place
and specifically I'd like to give a couple of examples from current work
that we have underway. Our work relies on accurate data to
understand what's going on with households and housing
in Aotearoa New Zealand and currently doing a bit of work for a community
trust in the South Island and the ability to look at say
rental housing stress changes in rates of home ownership of overcrowding
rely on data out of the census currently
and with the change in approach what we understand from engagement with
the stats New Zealand is that for communities under 5,000 in population
they're just going to become invisible.
You really won't be able to get down into the details like we currently are
in being able to separate households into income bands,
into renters and homeowners and then understanding their levels of housing
stress and other outcomes. And we find it somewhat interesting
at the time that we're moving toward and progressing with the social
investment approach that we support and relying on the IDI to be able to
understand outcomes from interventions and with these changes we have serious
concerns about the ability to understand especially in smaller communities
and as was noted by the prior respondents say by ethnicity
and with different Iwi affiliation and so we think that really putting in place
the fundamentals of the administrative data approach needs to be done before
we move away from the enumerated census because of that inability to really look down
into communities like districts in Waimati or McKenzie that have a few thousand households there.
Now going forward we've made a number of recommendations on how we think we can
mitigate some of the worst impacts but we really see the opportunity to do a pause
and to put in place the safeguards that are needed to ensure that we have the ability to
have accurate data on which to make informed decisions which we believe will be lost.
I'm currently also participating on a stats New Zealand user group around housing domains
in trying to understand how we can identify different data sets to replace what's going to be lost.
And some things are fairly fundamental and in in that work we know that say renters about
reliance on the MB bond data is only providing about 85% coverage.
So we're losing 15% of renters which we know is a growing portion of all households.
We also know that there are problems in matching Lynn's title data to addresses within stats New Zealand
which is important to understand coverage of say ownership of trusts and owner occupation.
And so there are some some known deficiencies in the proposed approach that's going to
fundamentally change the ability to have good data for housing. I think we all recognize
the fundamental importance of a home and how important it is to have a stable place to raise
a family to grow connections with the community. And we would urge the committee to look at the
timing of these changes and what needs to be put into place to ensure that we can continue to
have robust data on which to make informed decisions that are also fundamental to the
resource management reforms and projections that are going to be required to plan for growth over
30 years. And if we don't have a good understanding of the demographic and and other changes within
our population in areas how can we adequately plan for that future growth and ensure that we're
able to deliver outcomes that are better than what we're getting today. So with that I'll
hand it across to Paul who's joined us. Morning Paul. My apologies for lateness.
Andrew you must be running ahead of schedule. We are. Excellent. Well thank you for the time
you've given to us. I'm going to speak more to the logic of this proposed change and suggest
you know whether it's in a well-being context or in a social investment context
the I'm going to suggest the cost of not doing the census is is a quantum far greater than the cost
of doing it. And I'm questioning the logic for this change because in a world let's call it a
social investment world which is is where we are politically at this point in time. The costs
of not identifying groups and cohorts as Chris has just spoken to who are our most vulnerable
the risk is that we don't identify and intervene upstream in terms of the causes of those issues.
So let's talk briefly about homelessness which is one example that's in the public discourse at
present. It is far more expensive to treat people in an emergency department or to have them in
a prison than it is to address the upstream root causes to address that and everyone we've
spoken to and including one of the most eminent statisticians in the world, Liam Cook who was our
chief statistician and was also the chief statistician in the UK for a number of years
has told us the dangers of not doing the census and the risks of not identifying those people
inside households because this is the one opportunity we have to as a nation to look inside
a household in disaggregated forms into gender into ethnicity into age and we have as you know
a huge wave of older adults coming through to low fixed income retirement with no assets and no
provisions for their adequate housing and so I'm suggesting to you that the logic of getting rid
of the census is fundamentally flawed if you're even if you're just looking at it through a
financial lens and people internationally who have suggested this in other jurisdictions have lost
their jobs over this so it's something we're taking very seriously and so I'd ask you to consider that
in your deliberations and also you know to not to put too fine a point on it but making
homelessness illegal and then not counting them as homeless people does not fix the problem
so where's the logic for this change all right hey thank you for those comments can I ask you
you've made some helpful recommendations towards the end of your submission and you've one of them
which is increasing the sample size from 50,000 to 100,000 which Professor talked about last week
it do you think because the my understanding of the approach is obviously sample size is pretty
important you've said populations under 5,000 basically get missed out by increasing it to 100,000
and then your second limb was about better community work in terms of identifying those sort of very
specific communities that should be subject to some form of census how far does that go
towards addressing the problem it improves the data quality faster so I mentioned in my
opening remarks that you know is until 2032 that we anticipated being able to get down to
communities of about 5,000 in population and so by doubling it would bring that forward
and give you greater insights faster right I yeah carry on so it still doesn't replace
fundamental that you'll still have gaps but it does improve if this is the the approach
that's chosen to go it will help to mitigate the the worst of it and bring data forward more timely
but and I'm not trying to be contentious but just you talked about homelessness
even in the census we all realize that the census even now the last census had a quite
a significant element that wasn't counted couldn't be counted and homelessness isn't
notoriously difficult so even if you even if you carry the existing census wouldn't
wouldn't we still be having trouble trying to get a better understanding of you know homelessness
the usual example significant improvements been made in in process there internationally so
snowballing is is a is a well-known and accepted methodology for that in terms of getting out
what what we know is that homeless communities all over New Zealand even in small town and and
large centres have a community amongst themselves and so with with some diligent work using that
technique it can be a very effective method because they know where each other how to find
each other to put it bluntly and and I think even in communities below the 5,000 threshold and
it's worth mentioning for example the housing crisis that we have right now on the Chatham Islands
and also in the Lucky Order the Stuart Island you know sure it's a population of 450 people but
we have every summer an older adult housing crisis there which would be completely uh blind to if we
were using government source data because no one from Stuart Island who's a who's a lifelong islander
is going to get on a boat go to Invercargill to an msd office to report to ask to go on a list
for a house which does not exist in their community so we're really worried about the rural
damage that could be done by removing the census okay hey thank you for your time um very good
submissions actually we've got good submissions on this bill but yours is a very good one thank you
very much thank you right now we're going to our next submitter um hopefully Dr Katie Bates are
you but Bruce sorry Dr Katie Bruce or Patrick Guillemore are you Patrick
are they there on the screen
here we are um Patrick or Katie are you available
good morning Patrick how are you going and Katie Dr Katie box I think um thank you we've got 10
minutes with you um just please leave a little bit of time for questions for all shores
we are the national peak body connecting Tangata whenua and community in the voluntary sector
who supports the modernized census if it means more equitable more frequent and more community
centered data Tangata whenua and community the voluntary sector contribute immeasurably to the
well-being of Altaro so the census must be designed and now I view to see us we welcome
your questions and we urge the committee to strengthen the bill so census so the census
becomes more equitable more community centered and not less administrative data first risks
deepening inequity our data mapping existing data government data already is in our view piecemeal
small scale and disjointed particularly across statistics New Zealand the ministry of social
development Oranga Tamariki uh Department of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Business
Innovation and Employment data admin admin data reflects uh who government already counts
in our view marginalized groups voluntary networks informal groups rural organizations
are least likely to uh to appear reliably annual outputs must include community indicators
annual publication from 2030 is welcome but without explicit provision will default to
popular up to populations and in our view housing only uh this must embed an annual
framework voluntary rates community participation in social cohesion and please do not leave this
to discretion katie oh kia ora patrick uh tenakoto it's a real pleasure to to talk to you about
this really important issue today we have been trying as a peak body across the sector to understand
the data that's happening across 27 000 charities a hundred over 100 000 community
organizations and we have real concerns that if we are not able to do this with what's currently
available then what is now on offer in this bill we'll just make that uh we'll just make that
harder because essentially decision makers uh inside of the sector but also decision makers in
government cannot make good funding decisions cannot make good policy decisions unless you have
the right evidence and of course counting just what you already know inside of government
just doesn't give you that that broader picture the sector essentially is largely invisible
in the way that we present budget and in the way that that current administrative data
is collected and I can give you a tiny example of having done a review
into policing communities and policing outside of this mahi that police don't collect data on
disabled people that they interact with and so of course there's just a complete void and a
complete vacuum of information there even though we know that that overlap is really significant
now the not profit institution satellite account is one of those examples of something that
gave us such great in-depth information and we're reliant on that now from 2018 so pre-covid times
we're needing to make decisions about our sector about its resilience about its future from something
that is so outdated and so what we think is that um we need to essentially
given our sector is under acute pressure really concentrate this modernisation on the indicators
that are going to be make the most difference and be useful for decision making one of those
things for example is that the that's that Maori data sovereignty must be a design principle
it's not a group to consult with outside but it's actually needing to be designed in
designed in right from the beginning about what data is being collected how it's being
collected how it's being shared and then how it informs decision making all the way through
and this bill in its current form treats Maori data interests as a consultation item and not
foundational design principle and the bill should require co-design with with Maori
and we recommend reinstating so kupanga which gave such a holistic and real insight
into community level data so we hope that you can see the value outside of government decision
making and of course to inform decision making of community indicators and and community
regular and robust data to inform our sector and to inform government making decisions
Kia ora welcome any questions okay thank you I've got Todd Stevenson oh thanks and just
Katie to pick up one of your points can you explain what the non-profit institution
satellite accounts were how they operated and what kind of data that gave you access to
and were they part of the census because yeah so run by run by statistics New Zealand and I think
probably one of your next submitters Len Cook will be able to give you a really more in depth
answer than that I can but what they essentially gave us is they give a definition of the sector
they look at all the different components so all the different sub sectors the size and scale and
economic contribution of those different parts of our sector so you look at social services
housing and child and youth services all of those different parts in the environment arts
culture heritage and what they do is ask those organisations critical questions about about the
conditions for the sector and that is the only real in-depth information that we have
and was that part of the main five years since this or was it a separate piece of work Katie
so that's as my understanding is that it's a separate piece of work that is done by statistics
New Zealand okay now I've got Camilla Village. Thank you for your submission and thanks for
highlighting the Te Kupenga and the non-profit satellite report as well in terms of your
submission as your some of the other submitters to this bill have said that they're kind of
opposed to the change from a move to administrative data but your submission seems to be saying
let's increase the amount of administrative data or increase the number of data sets that we have
and make sure of course that they have data sovereignty and good principles in them is that
a correct reading of your submission that you're not opposed to change to administrative data but
you just want the data sets that are relied on to be increased and improved. Not quite so what
we are we are not opposed to the modernization of the census and the way in which we've got
administrative data and we've got the census so let's look at them together and really understand
what are the limitations of administrative data and if we rely on that alone we're missing out
hugely as you heard from the last submission and those gaps particularly those marginalised
communities and but but we do have that administrative data so let's use it let's not
pretend we don't have it but we need to make sure it's all linked up as part of a bigger
understanding across the sector but the census just gives us so much more than than they ever can.
Okay hey thank you for your submission this morning very very
lightning for that and great hope you have a good morning right now we've got Mr Peter Crempton
out by zoom as well have me
Helen oh Helen oh that's in a different sheet okay she's appearing
right oh yeah here I'll do you just shoot them right Helen are you with us?
Yes I hope you can see hear me I'm trying to make you see me
wait you can't see you but we can hear you that's the main thing okay apologies I'm not being able
to be seen my video is not turning on that's all right that's all right okay so um Dr Helen
figures in place of Professor Peter Crempton and presenting on behalf of the team that has
created the New Zealand deprivation index for every census from 1991 to 2023 we use data from
the full enumeration census of population and dwellings to quantify the relative socioeconomic
deprivation of small areas generally only one to 200 people often SA1s across New Zealand NZDEP was
initially created to help with resource allocation in the health sector but has also found a wide range
of use in other sectors like ICA and community law centres NZDEP is useful precisely because
it has an intensely place-based measure that identifies where people family and households
experience relative socioeconomic deprivation the full enumeration census of population and
dwellings has also been intensely place-based tying the characteristics of dwellings households and
people to the areas in which they live there are two main replacements to the full enumeration
census the census attribute survey and the admin population census so firstly the proposed
census attribute survey is place-based but it won't count everyone and will average
results over much larger areas than NZDEP users only those with 5 000 people or more this means no
information available at the SA1 level and no information available for almost all SA2s and
only for about half of SA3s and so it's not going to be useful for the creation of future NZDEPs
pockets of socioeconomic deprivation sometimes only one or two blocks long can exist inside well
off areas like Karori and similarly well off pockets can exist inside poorer locations and
capturing this small area diversity is one of the really important uses of NZDEP
the other thing but the administrative population census this will aim to capture everyone
but admin data is collected at the person level and is not intrinsically place-based
connections to place have to be worked out and as recently as march this year stats
New Zealand reported an address consistency of only 87 percent similarly although stats
New Zealand is investigating how to calculate families and households from person data it
cannot yet adequately do so also in March it reported a calculated household consistency
of only 68 percent families and households are vital subgroups of society and people's
experience in them is part of their socioeconomic experience and so they're important in NZDEP
there are also quality issues with admin data the information will only be as timely as the
person's last interaction with government services this means for some people it's
going to be wildly out of date or non-existent and for others extremely current whether or not
it's out of date could also be socioeconomically patent and the accuracy of data will be affected
by people's willingness to share information with the different services and the computer
systems and programming within which it's stored overall of the nine variables were used to
calculate NZDEP 2023 only three were at the person level and are already confirmed to be
available in some way inside the administrator population census the other three the other six
at the family household and dwelling levels may or may not become available some probably well
others almost certainly won't we currently don't know and we don't know how good the quality
and coverage of any our variables that do become available will be so these issues will
negatively affect the production of any future NZDEP like index and so we do not believe that any
changes should be made to the full enumeration census until it can be confirmed that the replacement
data is of adequate quality coverage and granularity and for these reasons we oppose this bill
if the bill is passed then we urge the committee to ensure adequate funding for stats
New Zealand and all the other government agencies who will need to be contributing admin data
for the formidable data task ahead to ensure that data of adequate quality is available
and we also recommend that in the very early 2030s there's a review to
implement it to investigate whether or not the data is actually suitable for New Zealand's data needs
and if not a plan to refer to a full enumeration census thank you any questions yes Helen um
just uh first of all in terms for the confidence level even with the last census the as you
will know the responses from individual households was is a decreasing number I forget
exactly what what was in the last census but the to try and get up back up to the confidence
level the stats New Zealand obviously had to rely on a lot of admin data anyway my question to you I
think you used to figure 87 but question to you is the is the increasing proportion of people are
not willing to respond to a census are they often the people that are the most vulnerable or is
that an unfair characteristics or characterization of the type of people who are not responding to
current census form do you have a view on that I do not know for certain I would certainly suspect
along with you that it's the most vulnerable people who are those who possibly interact least
with the census but the best consistency of 87 percent that was you use it comparing the
admin piece apc with the um census data that existed which had a bit of imputation going on
to begin with so that is probably if anything an overestimate of how good the address information is
okay so in your um submission um you at bottom of page two you talk about people with no access
to internet at home and say under the under the new approach using admin data no and will
never be able to get that information whereas at the moment with the census even with a
relatively low or a decreasing number of households responding to censuses
what why why do you say that there is no and probably never because presumably what
stats new Zealand will do they will go to all the internet providers in the country who will
know every household in the country and know what the proportion wouldn't be connected so
is that that would be an obvious approach for stats new Zealand to adopt but you
you just blandly say that there would never be available i'm just asking why did you come to that
view well we say probably never not certainly never and we come to that view because it is not
government data and um for instance stats new zealand's had some information available on connection
to the electricity network for some time but it is not available in the idi and um it has not
been a priority we don't we don't know for certain how we don't know the future but certainly it's not
going to be it's unlikely to be available before this adequate family or household data it and
okay well that's certainly a question we'll direct to stats new zealand so thank you for
that view on that and that's been that's helpful okay um thank you uh helen that's been very helpful
and uh particularly and um presenting that and on behalf of uh peter crampton as well professor
crampton as well so thank you both for your contributions been very good okay right now
i'm going to ask mr cook uh to come to the front hopefully again we're obviously looking forward
to your submission mr cook um giving your background thank you mr chairman hopefully not only because
of its length thank you mr chim for the opportunity to talk can i say it's my experience is government
statistician in the united kingdom in new zealand and extensive exchanges over the years with european
pacific and commonwealth statisticians that have led me to offer you the advice that you need to
initiate an independent review is this change that simple and even necessary officials say that it
doesn't change the legal framework governing how we collect the census in fact by making the administrative
date of first regime mandatory for future population statistics you are placing constraints the limits
on the statistical properties of our statistics by your actually setting in stone a path that's with
un with with untried inflexible methodology by deliberately removing much needed flexibility
this bill is a methodological handcuff on the independence of the statistician because you're
telling them what they can't do and i think rmp is really equipped to decide what and where
statistical methods are best used for understanding new zealand's populations i think you that you're
misreading what you're saying in the bill few can also make the point that few of the administrative
records that must be used can possibly conform to the international statistical standards that
are embedded in survey designs and official statistics this non-conformance will undermine
the quality of many international comparisons and make a break with many past statistics
on ethnicity occupation family for example um the bill will force change in statistical frames
and um mr vigas has really explained that really well going to make a point that for which
she has spent 200 billion on infrastructure placing it huge issues of emergency management
housing and places it's got huge issues of environmental control we need to know more
about place rather than give away what we have by shifting to a person frame from a household
frame normally in most countries administrative data is recognized as taking up a growing
share of the information that it enables us to integrate with official statistics
other countries every other country and our model is exploiting this expanding integration
capability um by actually using the infrastructure of households that it has by developing geospatial
frames i would argue land and information in new zealand and the government's statistician
are five to ten years behind the eight wall getting seduced by the i di they have lost the plot
and are out and we're basically at risk of abandoning the critical elements of our
statistical infrastructure no other country has adopted this new zealand model in the uk i know a
lot about that they explicitly rejected such an unorthodox model last year even after first
investigating it since 1987 these ideas are not modern in london our statistics these bills
have been justified by recent reviews of the census i would argue and it's very clear the
last two censuses were complete london's they no longer do not represent how we have run
censuses in the past or other countries run them the review of 2018 census for example
pointed out that the department wrongly relied on out-of-date address lists
people were never even counted i must remind you that a census is a census of population
and dwellings the first job of a government statistician is to find every place every
dwelling where people are exist and then you inquire of them that was not done in 2018
or 2023 it was even compounded by the then minister of statistics david clark and his
cabinet agreeing to only get 90 of the population in the census absolutely bizarre move the 23
census repeated that abysmal result only as the external review pointed out the the
address lists were even worse the factor cost twice as much as any census we've had before
has not been investigated the finance ministers i work for richardson birch and gordon brown
would have had my guts are strewn around the bloody place uh this has not been investigated i
don't know where our finance ministers are the findings of michael heron qc on the manurewa
erasers highlighted incredibly poor monitoring and substandard quality management on the 2023
census i believe you're wrong mr chairman in asserting that the 2018 census or 23 censuses
are benchmarks of performance that we should use to justify any change they're out of line with
international experience our Aussie mates continue to do better a couple of other final comments
there is a view in 2024 of what was statistics used for this report totally ignores if you do a
little search of keywords doesn't use the word infrastructure except statistical deprivation
is mentioned once fiscal isn't yet we've got with a 30 30 production in our fiscal position
in the next 20 years surely the rethinking of the welfare state ought to be part of a planning
of our census emergency isn't there so emergency management stats don't know and despite the existence
of simon upton climate is uh mentioned once could i say also do you know the the electoral commission
has not obtained any independent statistical advice of the changes to these metrics that are now in
the electoral amendment bill pretty unwise i'd say in my written submission i've listed eight
critical actions that would enable a trustworthy census of population and dwellings to take place
in 2028 within the law as it is now can i just conclude by saying this is them to me this is
the most significant change to new zealand's official statistics in the last 50 years and
i've been around that long parliament is being asked to urgently endorse major electoral
changes making it even more vital that members of parliament seek independent advice also this
bill gives excessive unfettered discretion to a government statistician on constitutional matters
which may of course obscure things that do need transparency particularly given the untried
nature of what we're now doing right thank you first question camilla billage thank you very
much for your submission we've heard that the cost of a future census under the current law
would be prohibitive in terms of being able to continue that from what you've said today
it appears that you you don't accept that um the cost that has been provided would necessarily
be being ordered to for another census under this existing law to to run is that correct
well i would look at the cost of censuses in the past not just the last two the last one is bizarre
you know uh so would you would you really use that as a baseline without properly
understanding where the money went we do not know where the money went i can't find out the external
review did not tell us where the money went it's simply told it didn't even tell us that it was
twice as much per capita i had to do that calculation myself so the um yeah that's a
interesting because obviously the 2018 was 180 million from memory and 325 and
in 2023 um
my i'm keen to get your view on this but my understanding was that increasingly it's
difficult to get people to respond to censors or censors that's the issue we've got and it's not
nissan it's not uncommon all all jurisdictions where it's england we've worked obviously canada
what australia whatever everyone around the world is increasingly having trouble when people front
up to someone's house and ask for information a lot of them are now saying take a take a hike
or your government's i'm not going to get my information to government so a there is obviously
the cost factor and my understanding that the estimate for the next census would have been much
even higher because of that declining um really most of people to respond what was your experience
in england was that also happening there or people just saying to us to the person who's
turning up wanting to get asked census questions they were just saying take a hike in 2001 we didn't
have any problems we had were of our own making um but just response rates there had declined but
not the same extent like the Australians are about 95 percent yeah um just say that there's a lot
of knowledge we have through epidemiological work of as big as um and ai we could actually
anticipate in small areas of new zealand knowing the past information we've got what is the
likelihood that this particular patch will be more difficult than others you could have a
comprehensive spectrum and then you can target where your resources are the difficulty that
you have if you don't have use that information you're assuming for a start that everywhere will
be roughly the same and therefore you don't deploy your resources this is what the Australians
for example are doing is using quite a lot of thinking well in advance to delineate small
areas of Australia of where they think response response problems will be greater and then
they manage that we could use local government much more that this last couple of census is
completely ignored local government and what about in england what were your response rates in
england showing that what were your response rates in england they were about 96 95 percent we had some
areas where we had a real problem uh for example young men yeah uh were a problem and in Britain
also we made the error in our planning of not having a de facto census like requiring everyone
to fill in a form and then extracting residents we allowed people to tell us whether they were
arrested so we created some difficulties in that unusual um uh census but did you have a
difference of legislative framework that uh put the onus on the individual to respond and if they
didn't there was some form of i don't want to use word penalty but some form of sanction if they didn't
we we didn't but like for in the past um we've normally ended up prosecuting about five or
six hundred people you could adopt a model that basically has a parking ticket type arrangement so
a new senate can you can we penalize can we prosecute people under that same framework do we
have a similar framework for what you had in england for instance we've we've we've like i know in
england we've always prosecuted some five hundred odd people in new Zealand yes i am um and there's a
measure of fairness uh but you know that they're often the people that have been most obstructive
but our response rate of the last census was way down wasn't it i think in the 80s yes and i think
that was a an unforced error right um got a question from mr. Conner yeah um so what are you
talking about some sort of a hybrid model um obviously we've got statistics now we didn't have
in your day there i'll say glenn um and so we would be foolish to ignore that
think that there is even if it's just for um to to legitimize or to um the information that we're
getting could could you see a good hybrid model there oh i believe administrative data has a really
critical role but you need to retain the household frame and i think by giving it up what you're
doing here you are seriously constraining how a future government statistician would think
we need nearly or we need those records there are some forms of information uh that are really
quite vital but they're not only the administrative records the state has we also need a wealth of
other information you imagine if we've had school roll information every six months the the problem
we've got is that population change in small places now is much more dynamic than it has ever
been but isn't that the argument for uh moving to a much of model and again i'm just asking this
question right because you know the disadvantage of a five-year census is that it's immediately out of
date whereas a rolling approach to it and you know you use school roles you can get that information
from the ministry of education we can work out how many maori are getting diabetes treatment from
ministry of health we could we can work out you know what the justice system is showing all
those sort of stuff we can use third parties to provide a lot of information around household
data whether they have a mobile or not why and that can be done in almost real time why wouldn't
you want to be moving to a model like that or do you say are you suggesting you have to have a
five-yearly model as a sort of a standard sort of benchmark to check it out occasionally well we
have a five-yearly model but we have annual population estimates and so we keep track
of what's going on in the population in every place every year that's been done since the
19th century so but what what i'm suggesting is that you're making two changes here one is
proposing the greater use of administrator and that's happening everywhere in the world
you're also proposing to change the fundamental statistical frame of our population statistics
to person rather than household and as was explained by Helen Vigas that's a massive shift
it's also making it very difficult to integrate information that's also collected by household
our census frame gives us a great opportunity to survey for example people who are disabled
people who wish to study predict we can target particular populations with a census frame in
a way that you can't with admin data why can't you why can't you do a mini survey just table
disability because if i was if i want to do reviews people with disabilities and i think
the estimate is 250 000 by time you take a mental as full as physical 250 000 people in the country
estimate um out of a population over five million why would i why would i just need a census every
five years to get a view on them why wouldn't i target the disability community in particular
but you don't have an overview five years you only have it periodically when there's
regarded as a need we haven't had a disability census
can i say in 1965 the disability community was going to boycott the census because it was the
only way of getting disability information we picked a canadian model had a disability question
then ran a survey based on a sample of the people that said they had handicap and a smaller
sample of those that didn't and that's how the census is actually a really rich part of our
statistical fabric not just being a census but being a sort of frame for gathering all
sorts of population information. Todd Stevenson. Thanks and thanks for being here and in your
submission um i just want to ask you appear to be saying that there's a um well it's there's a
kind of barrier so let's just be clear right the census is actually individual data then
collected at a household level so in a sense it's actually just aggregated to the household
but are you saying that with the administrative data there's some barrier to aggregating
to a household level is that yes okay can you just talk a little bit more through what the
barriers is you see because people don't identify their family relationships in most
administrative data don't forget we have no single administrative data source that covers
the whole population so if you want to cover the whole population it's done with a both a
hotchpotch in terms of the source but also the period so the reference period for example if you
Mr Chairman were to ask the stats office now for the information that's in the idea not not in the
sense that in the idei about you in December last year you will find some of it will go right back
to five or ten years ago so it's that hotchpotch of a period that is the problem for analytical
work with administrative data. But is that but surely there is some technology solution where
we could make sure every household we i see someone not shaking in the back but i mean
we have rates information for example to every address in New Zealand um some people will and
some data sets obviously you'll identify that you live at x address so there must be some
even if it doesn't exist today there must be some ways around some of these issues well
we won't have occupation information soon about the whole population because the tax department
no longer requires any of us who have all are able to simply get their tax return determined
mechanistically by the tax office so we're going to lose the one public administration source of
occupation data if you move to this model we will not have occupation information at an
extraordinary interesting time in the economic structure change in New Zealand so that's the
sort of area government statisticians are the bottom of the tree in determining what
administrations we fought for 40 years to get the registrar general to add a simple question on a
birth record how many children have you had before this birth in the end we put it in the census
because it was the only way we could find during a time of massive fertility decline whether in
fact people were deferring births or or whether they were not going to have them anymore so that
you know there's a real tension in what you can get in admin data it's only what the
departments themselves want and how they management is frankly not up to statistical standards
okay your second point on your last question you talked about and I think you're implying
leisurely the chief statistician under this new piece of legislation no longer has to account
at a household level is that what you're I'm trying to clarify is what we said is are you saying that
this this legislation proposed bill changes the prime intent of the or the role of this
chief statistician yes for future statisticians you don't have to do it actually to deliver the
intent of what you want to do you do not have to have the bit at the front that says in future
the government statistician will be abound by the administrative data first I don't call it census
ministry of the first model future work you actually got a clause in there that I don't think
you've either thought about or you have understood the importance to a proper government statistician
but precisely the limits of independence so just to be clear is it you're not suggesting that
that chief statistician or future chief statisticians have to get information on households
and people in particular to make up that household data what you're saying is the bill allows
the chief statistician to use other alternative means to get that data but you're also saying at
the start this will be the model you'll be forced to use for the census right and when you say that
you're actually binding the future government statistician and you're saying on one hand
they're independent on methods so you've got a bit of a contradiction right but it doesn't
but clean them from doing surveys and survey well no that's not binding but but you're limiting it
because if they're only going to have a person frame to use from the census then where do they
get their household frame from which is normally at every five years because the sense of the
poppet census of dwellings is the only time in New Zealand we know where everyone actually lives
in New Zealand there is no decent address list don't go to the post office that tells you where
everyone is in New Zealand it's the five yearly census of dwellings right hey now mr. Cook we're
way over time we were very keen to hear from you so thank you for coming this morning really
appreciate your time thank you very much for your forbearance of my possibly can I just say
the first study of British administrative data was by a New Zealand a dr. Michael Cullen
but it's called the statistical movement in early Victorian Britain
yeah all right thanks yeah yeah we're a bit behind who have we got next
okay cool in person is that you marina how you go just um that was very compelling
and uh wow thank you mr. Cook give me a second of course I feel really intimidated now no don't
feel intimidated at all that was we're looking forward to hearing your submission
don't worry he intimidated us too we're all you want some more yeah he's that sort of
intellectual character do you want some water do you want some water yes yes all right
and that's why I came early because I wanted to hear the other um speakers and
that's really helpful lecture I think when people have heard previous speakers yeah thank you
for them wow
I should have gone before
okay
tenakoutou
eti committee ko hakepa toku ingoa
representing to wahine water or hakepa foundation
I have previously engaged with the justice select committee
um with the Māori electoral
oh wow I'm really flustered now we remember I'm really interested yeah pop
place statistical formula last year in august um and that was within my parliamentary petition
increase the number of Māori electorates so I appreciate the opportunity to speak today
and uh just a few months ago I decided I think I'm ready to participate and have a look at
parliamentary bills so when I saw um this bill I was quite chuffed and I thought this is me
in my area um part of my area uh so this bill oh god focuses on improving how census
data is collected and produced that data directly underpins how representation is calculated in
New Zealand um so I'm also new to using data um to be quite honest a bit of a late bloomer
so I'm going from the other speakers um about the the bigger picture
uh
to ahine order or hakepa foundation supports the intent to improve data collection
including the move toward more frequent population data and also um the shift of pushing back the
census to 2030 um takes time to implement new systems and um
and hearing um the other sub submissions submissions and especially Mr Cook um
um
is compelling um but I still support um to go forward um because there's a lot of
knowledge coming through to help the you know just the select committee and you know the government to
to um create a more robust system anyway
however improved data collection within a flawed electoral statistical formula model
does not produce oh shit does not produce fairness
it produces more precise inequity so I've focused specifically on part two related
amendments to other legislation the amendments to the local electoral 2001 clause 19 bracket four
and I've just um focused on that the definition of the Maori electoral population so um
so clause 19 does not come into force until the the first of January 2030 um I just want to
speak um briefly I'm not going to speak on the whole um
clause but I have um separated into um four sections um that my first recommendation um
which is 19 bracket four section 51a of the local electoral act I'll just speak on that first part um
um that prior to the government's statistician deriving a Maori electoral population figure under
section 356a of the electoral act 1993 I propose that there is a dedicated electoral population
statistical formula bill be introduced um
and at the moment I'm finalizing a private bill um to help that along
so clause 19 uh section 51a and this clause 19 four the wording demonstrates how the model
continues to reproduce the same structural issue of inequity
of inequity and under representation of persons of Maori descent the wording in here um describes
the Maori ratio although it does not mention the Maori ratio that's what it is is describing so
I specifically put um
of I do not um support any of that section and I put my recommendation again I'm not going to
go into all of that um
oh god that's just terrible um
in just um oh god I'm losing that now that's all right we've we've we've um we've got your
submission yeah we've read it yeah we've read it so the I just want to um close and finish on
the the last section of that um number five um where it
I've basically it doesn't need to be there and what I've what I recommend that the Maori ratio
the formula is r equals m divided by m plus g times d is abolished as that is what under
represents the total Maori descent population in New Zealand um so any figure produced using
the current methodology regardless of improved data quality will continue to risk generating
inequitable representation outcomes so ah yeah so the Maori ratio um is
yeah under the definition for the Maori electoral population um I completely um I don't know why it
was ever used um and it's proven in the last two two years um the Electoral Commission um
data that the theory to use the Maori ratio um is highly inaccurate because it's it's in a
it's it's an assumption it says proportional but it's an assumption that the behavior of
unenrolled Maori in the future um is the same as enrolled Maori on the Maori roll and is like
the same as enrolled Maori on the general roll so that assumption that's what it is it's a
it's based on proportional but it's assumption um that is highly inaccurate and um that's
sort of where my my mahi is focused and um okay thank you hey well thank you and you've
submitted we've actually as a committee responded to you previously on your submission around this
we wrote back to you quite comprehensively on that issue so we're looking forward to getting
your members bill you've mentioned before but um thank you for your submission this morning
and uh doing a good job thank you right now we're going to the data ewe leaders group uh
in Hamilton I think so good morning marina
are you are you with us can you see them
good morning how are you
you know by thank you uh and thank you for the opportunity to present to the panel
look uh I'm just going to give a hitchhiker's guide into who we are before passing to
uh to present the key points on our submission uh and again thank you to you uh and the uh
just the select committee for allowing us this time you will know that we are the data data
ewe leaders group which formulates part uh and represents statistical and digital sort of
considerations for the national ewe tears forum who represents more than 80 odd ewe uh right across
the country uh I'm uh talking to you uh and to um uh Andrew as the former minister of statistics
you're you're acutely aware of some of the relationships here we have we stood up 10 years
ago uh to address the inadequacies as the fallibilities and the inconsistencies of the
census data are right from uh the the 1990s uh and we first established with minister James
Shaw and minister Penny Henry who were the ministers in charge of statistics at that time together
we formulated a working program to address uh the inadequate Maori captured data uh that was
prevalent in the last few censuses since that time 10 years ago we've worked with no less than 14
ministers uh ministers and associate ministers for uh statistics we've worked with no less than
four government statisticians uh here uh as well so over that time we have created a
comprehensive relationship you all know uh that in the last census um Te Kahuiraoma and the data
ILG worked very closely with stats New Zealand uh to stand up three pilot programs for data
capture for Maori as a catalyst for other areas across the country we achieved
night a night a more than 90 percent percentile uh over those three uh areas uh in the last census
and you'll be aware that last year Te Kahuiraoma and the data ILG uh came out and put out the
Maori population data uh in in concert with stats New Zealand uh and so the first um NGO
output of data uh was a huge step um if we are to rely on administrative administrative data solely
we think that that will be to the detriment of capture uh and data statistics for Maori
and for uh New Zealand I'm going to pause there um uh Mr Chair uh and pass now to Kirikouwhai Mikaide
who is our um expert and lead technician in this space and one of the authors of the
Maori data governance model uh to step through the key points of our submission
um I just want to reiterate Rahui's thanks thank you for allowing us to make the submission and for
joining today to provide an oral submission uh on the data and statistics uh amendment bill um as Rahui
said we're here today on behalf of the data EB leaders under the mandate of the National
Ewi Chairs Forum and we play a vital role in fostering Maori data governance and the ethical use
of data for the betterment of iwi of Hapu and whanau Maori I'm going to take our submission as read
but I would like to reiterate some of the key points for all of you today and then uh we'll
be available for some questions at the end not as hard questions as what you threw at um
Len Cook but we'll try um our position on this bill is very clear we reject the bill in its entirety
this includes the supplementary amendments required to the electoral amendment bill
census data is a powerful tool for iwi Maori and it can help shape a prosperous future for our people
what was once a weapon for sub-education and colonization of Maori is now an instrument
of visibility advocacy and planning and this bill puts this valuable tool at risk
we think the bill is heading in the wrong direction but this select committee has an
opportunity to steer a new course one that supports Maori to flourish and enables
transparent crown decision-making and fair electoral representation and we have some
solutions to help you achieve this uh but before we highlight the solutions uh let's revisit some
of the key issues with the bill as it's drafted we feel the process has failed iwi Maori and changes
of this magnitude require genuine shared decision-making and this has not happened here this bill
and the decision-making process falls well short of the crown's own fertility obligations and of
the minority relationship agreement that we have with statistics New Zealand iwi Maori are not
advisors or priority communities we are your partners today i want to highlight three key problems
with the admin first approach firstly critical variables will be lost iwi affiliation Maori
descent and Te Reo Maori will no longer be reliably captured this is whakapapa data and atonga
under te te re te and that requires care and protection at the most basic level if you do not
count people you do not see them if you do not see people you cannot serve them smaller population
groups will be invisibilized and our people will suffer secondly admin data is crown filtered
and is not fit for purpose admin data reflects interactions with the government services often
in deficit contexts and in some cases collected without free prior and informed consent many
Maori are not even visible in government services data this means the data produced under this model
will be incomplete and unreliable with far-reaching consequences for iwi and the crown
thirdly quality will fall and costs will likely rise the government claims that this change is more
cost-effective than the full enumeration approach but this is not necessarily the reality poor data
quality will cost our country far more than it saves without good data you cannot make effective
policy or investment decisions for Aotearoa New Zealand managing this transition well
will require investment significant and significant investment and that will still not solve the
underlying issue this model is not fit for purpose investing to correct it especially in a way that
reflects iwi Maori interest will require significant new spending as it stands this change will
current I will materially harm Maori the consequences of moving forward will this with
this bill will be long-standing our democratic rights are at risk pushing the release to 2030
means the 2029 general election uh electorate numbers will be based off outdated data this
impacts the rights of Maori to participate in the democratic process and the right to
fair and equitable Maori representation inferior data quality also creates concerns around
electoral boundary accuracy fanning the flames of mistrust and democratic processes and decisions
our ability to monitor and planned is weakened iwi Maori we use census to monitor the crown's
own policies and impacts we use the census to monitor our own impacts it's a mechanism to
keep the crown and ourselves accountable and to identify where we need to act to balance the
waka our right to self-determination is further diminished the admin first data shifts the power
to define iwi Maori populations from iwi Maori ourselves to the crown moving from a predominantly
self-reported count of iwi Maori to a collection of data provided for other purposes
complemented by statistical modeling extinguishes our right to self-determine our identity
we will lose our right to be counted on our own terms but it's not too late to change things
we're not just opposing the bill we are providing solutions our investment proposal to the previous
minister of statistics sets out three iwi-led initiatives building on the initiatives that
rahui talked about with respect to the 2023 census so firstly a Maori descent population file
secondly an iwi Maori survey program and lastly a Maori descent census these will go some way
towards mitigating the harm created by the proposed changes in the census model but harm
mitigation is not enough the committee can and must do more we ask the committee to recommend
the bill does not proceed until four conditions are met one an independent review of the admin data
first models fitness for purpose is conducted secondly statistics new zealand commits to
transparently implementing the Maori data governance model thirdly adequate long-term crown funding
is set aside for iwi design data solutions that meet our data needs and lastly independent
assurance is provided to guarantee that Maori electoral rights will not be harmed
through any change in the census model right thank you very much now we're a little bit over time
and first of all i just wanted to knowledge what you do and the professionalism you bring
on behalf of Maori in terms of data so i just want to say that publicly
my question to you and obviously you spoke to Hon. Shane Reddy about your investment proposals
what what gives you concern that and as you alluded to in your speech during the last census
you played a very important role in terms of getting better accuracy around Maori data
in certain areas and you and without that the quality of the data would have been very poor
what gives you concern that that similar approach would not continue under admin data so that
we end up getting very specific data around iwi along the lines that you talked about in your
introduction i think so there are those three key variables that are of most concern to us
and so when i if i focus in on just iwi affiliation you will know as the previous minister we
redesigned that whole iwi affiliation question in the 2023 census particularly the online question
which completely changed the quality of data that we received particularly from the 2018 census
that question now will not exist in any administrative collections
but it would be it would if you if you'd ended up doing more surveys specifically
around iwi which is part of the approach with the admin data to be more tailored with
certain surveys or we am i am i overstating that i think overstating that so at the moment the
the iwi affiliation my understanding is the default will be the ministry of education's
iwi affiliation data where they only allow three answers the census allowed 16 answers
to the iwi affiliation question but it's also not the question is not designed similar to the
census question that we had and so i guess that's why we're proposing the iwi Māori survey program
and a wider consideration of particular solutions but as it stands there is not quality administrative
iwi affiliation data that will help with the gaps all right minister if i could if i could just add
those things out of the government departments are steered towards an outcome in the education
sector in the health sector in the whatever sector it doesn't lend itself to questions and answers
that lend itself to Māori population data and so that's where a huge amount of concern is for us
all right hey thank you both for being with us this morning and very good to see you both again but
very helpful submission right members we're going to jump now to retail in New Zealand
i think caroline yang is on the line i saw her before
caroline are you there is she still there i'm gonna go all right cool retail in New Zealand
good morning nice to see you both um as you know i'm caroline yang this is my colleague i'm
denise garland i'm the advocacy manager here at retail NZ of course look thank you very much for
your time and i guess really briefly we know that you've read our submission you know overall we
support the tenor of the bill but there's probably some specific things we just really wanted to
pull out about and one is just the importance of making sure that the information gathered
is going to be accurate enough to depict the changing demographics that we're likely to see
across New Zealand over the you know the next 10 20 30 years which is going to change significantly
retailers use data and information to help them determine you know where a store should be
located what demand is whether their products are best in that community or another community
so it's a really important aspect for retail to be able to understand each individual community
and making sure that there's the data is robust enough that it could give us that granular information
so that you know we can continue to ensure that we can serve communities well across all of our
local spaces so we think that that is really important we do think that a cadence of annual
is a positive move forward because you know with the with the anticipated changes in our
demographics it will be really important for us as a country to really understand how we need to
move and what services are required in mod areas as those changes occur so we think that that
would be a really useful space yeah I think there's mostly I just also think that one of our
recommendations is just ensuring that some there is a robustness or as there is some
consideration taken into how those more difficult to reach populations are accounted for in the
data collection that obviously every level of data is really important and so some of
those regions or populations where they don't interact so much with official sectors there just
needs to be a little bit more consideration as to how that information is gathered about those
populations as well and especially for those I guess that touches really into those new migrants
to New Zealand whose English may not be their first language they may not be familiar and how do
we make sure that we capture those parts of our community so that we we can ensure that we
can serve us the whole of New Zealand as we're going to continue to change in the coming years
okay thank you very much members who got questions just one question
your your last point retailers require a complete picture of local population I presume
we've heard the difficulty and the lack of granular information with a 50,000 sample
yeah you when you say local can you give us sort of a view on what to what extent that you need
that granularity just to try it from a retail commercial perspective what what would what would
be important to you yeah so I think from a from a commercial perspective if you're thinking about
opening a supermarket or something you'd want to know that in a suburb or if you think of
Auckland you'd want to know what's what movement is happening in each of those suburbs that is it
occurs if you're in a more provincial area like I'll use Marston because I grew up there
you know you're probably wanting detail from that type of community that demonstrates what's
happening you know there's if I think about the wider upper there's been significant changes
of how people live and where they're located in the wider upper since I lived there and if
you're only taking a snapshot of a few people across New Zealand you're not going to understand
where that push pull factor is going to come in terms of demand and supply okay hey fantastic
hey lovely to see you both again nice to see your shirt your I don't know what you call it but
behind you it's a red bull dress yes all right hey good to see you both thank you can't keep
me by thank you now we're going to um Lisa who's only I think it's that right uh by zoom
Lisa are you with us this morning
couldn't Lisa be there um we're looking forward to hearing from you thank you
good morning
Tenapoto Kato Kiora Kiora we now we've got 10 minutes with you okay uh call Lisa Pizzoni
Toko Ingwer I'm the founder and lead architect of the indigenous data authority thank you for
the opportunity to appear and I am here to speak to the practical implications of the
proposed amendments to the data and statistics census framework and the increased reliance on
administrative data um I acknowledge that under the data and statistics act 2022 agencies are
authorized to collect share and integrate data for statistical purposes I also acknowledge that
administrative data and data matching are established tools within the government systems
including the electoral context under the electoral act 1993 my submission is not that
these powers should not exist my submission is that expanding reliance on them in place of a
comprehensive census introduces material risks that are not currently mitigated the proposed
direction shifts the system away from a direct population-wide self-reported census towards
a model that relies on administrative data data integration and statistical modeling this is
not a minor change it is a structural change to how population reality is constructed a full
census present provides a baseline that is directly sourced from individuals standardized
across the population and independently verifiable administrative data does not provide that it
reflects who interacts with services who those services uh what those services collect
and how systems are designed as a result the data set begins to reflect the system and not the
population groups that engage less with services are recorded inconsistently or are not fully
captured by existing systems and they will be underrepresented that's not a possibility
that's an expected outcome many administrative systems were never designed for statistical
completeness they do not ask the same questions use consistent definitions or capture information in
a way that is comparable across agencies this leads to gaps inconsistent classification and
reliance on estimation when that data is aggregated and modeled those limitations compound as
reliance on modeling increases outputs may appear complete but appearance is not the same as accuracy
when data is incomplete at source and used to generate inferred results the final data set is
built on assumptions that are not always visible or testable this creates a condition where decisions
are made on data that cannot be fully verified against reality alongside these risks there is
a second issue data is collected under specific conditions for a defined purpose under a particular
under a particular authority and within a specific context under the current and proposed framework data
can be moved combined and reused across systems however there is no consistent mechanism to ensure
that authority and context travel with that data and this simply means that systems are not
required to demonstrate that the use remains consistent with the original purpose and that
authority remains valid or that the context has been preserved authority is assumed rather than
verified and the system increasingly reliant on integrated and modeled data this creates a material
governance gap decisions are made using data where the original purpose is unclear the authority
cannot be demonstrated and the context has been lost in any other regulatory environment that
would be considered a failure of control this matters because the point of risk is no longer
collection it is use if the system cannot demonstrate that it has authority to use data in a given
context at the point it is being used then the legitimacy of the decision cannot be assured
the census also provides an independent point of validation it allows governments to check
administrative data identify inconsistencies and confirm whether outputs align with the population
if that function is reduced there is no equivalent mechanism to replace it without an
independent benchmark the system becomes self-referential these risks apply across the population
that they are amplified for Maori the census is currently the only mechanism that allows Maori
to self-identify at scale and in a consistent way no administrative system replaces that function
administrative systems do not consistently capture Maori identity iwi or hapu affiliation
and if reliance shifts to those systems Maori are more likely to be undercounted
misclassified or simply not captured at all at that point under representation becomes
structural and over time this reduces visibility reduced visibility has direct consequences
like funding services and policy decisions because that all follows data if Maori are not
fully visible in that data they are not fully reflected in those decisions and there is also a
contextual risk Maori data is connected to identity whakapapa and collective representation
when it is removed from its original context and combined with other data sets and reused its
meaning can change without mechanisms to carry forward context and authority outputs may appear
valid but not accurately reflect Maori reality the effects of this shift will accumulate over time
small inaccuracies will become embedded gaps become normalized decisions become incomplete
or decontextualized data begin to shape outcomes without a reliable baseline and without the ability
to verify authority and context at the point of use that cannot be corrected there is also
an accountability issue the census currently provides a reference point to assess representation
track disparities and evaluate where the commitments are being met and if that reference
point is weakened it becomes significantly harder to demonstrate where the outcomes are
aligned with reality this is not just a data issue it is a governance issue in the electoral
context the implications extend further data is used to maintain electoral role
confirm eligibility and support participation if that data is incomplete or used without
verified authority there is a risk to the integrity of those processes this submission
does not argue against administrative data it argues that it cannot replace a comprehensive
census without interest introducing systemic risk if the committee is minded to press
to proceed then at a minimum data use for statistical decision-making purposes
must carry verifiable information on its origin authority and context and systems must be able
to demonstrate at the point of use that the data remains valid for that purpose the issue is not
where the government can use data Lisa Lisa Lisa I'm just conscious we've got some questions and
we're running out of time sure right first one from Mr O'Connor oh look Lisa thanks very much
we heard from Len Cook that really that a census should be about dwellings and where people
really relating back to where they're living and abiding do you think that the data that's
being relied on is going to be robust enough to really tie back to where people are living
to their dwellings I think it's much more than just dwellings if you're going to
reflect the population it needs to reflect the population and not just living basis of it
um I think you risk uh yeah I think you risk um not being as robust as it needs to be in
terms of population data if you went down this track all right thank you thank you um can I just
answer obviously we're legislators and on your second page you talk about suggest the legislative
consideration and you you're saying we're suggesting we should recommend that the bill
require that any data used in its production of official statistics demonstrates the authority
consent and data providence which Matthew you've been talking about how would you encapsulate that in
a piece of legislation what what do you and I'm trying to understand you know that's an important
principle but I'm trying to understand how you would see that coming through in a piece of legislation
so I think it needs to take into consideration how uh Maori data is seen in um in difference
as just data so so Maori data is not neutral it is uh relational so we see it as part of our
whakapapa as our you know that sort of thing I think the distinction between just data which is seen
often as a commodity as to something that is relational and I think once that distinction
is understood then it can quite easily be um embedded in legislation okay very good hey thank you for
your presentation Lisa that's been very helpful thank you thank you right now we're going to
Johnson Godfrey you understand I saw him uh coming on screen Mr Godfrey are you there
right
Mr Godfrey we're ready for you if you're there
just got to find the button to the unmute hopefully very good we can hear you at least lovely
oh you want to see me as well probably preferable but that's up to you
takes a bit of time
let me get started there we go all right good morning doctor beauty good morning um
I'm going to start with the the thing that everyone should understand is that this bill takes away
the certainty of a census which is well defined outside the law and offers an admin data first
approach with pretty much no explicit expectations to go forth in an operate sorry to go forth and
operate in an environment where no explicit or implicit rules are in place
I do believe that admin data first is possible in the long run and I emphasise the long run
I'm also a firm believer that more frequent targeted surveys serve specific populations of interest
better than the official system today but there are plenty of identified gaps in the admin data
first system as proposed and the ADF approach trades off quality in order to gain frequency
we might understand what frequency looks like we have very little idea about the quality
ironically the the shortcomings are actually disposable courtesy of the fact that we do
currently have a census I suggest that even if admin data first is possible it is not
yet actually proven to be a solution the future of census and defeat independent evaluation panel
that I chaired did not get to actually assess the feasibility etc of an admin data first it was
an assumption that the move was on that would have been outside our terms of reference
what we did conclude was that there is no way that admin data first was feasible for the 2028 census
so switching from a known to a plethora of unknowns seems rather unwise it is a gamble
I suggest to you that while it might be described as something akin to an old horse and cart
you are being offered the chance to trade in that horse and cart for an as-yet-unbroken
foal from a race horse stud that has no track record
where is the protection if admin data first fails you have none
so parliament should not be gambling with New Zealand's data future like this
I've listed a bunch of recommendations and conditions from my area of expertise
where I can see shortcomings that need to be proven before we can move on
others will have their own lists but that list of unknowns is getting long far too long
from my area of expertise we do not have a sensible measure to indicate disability status
by admin data we are not even close to getting that
you've asked questions today I love people who ask questions but what it shows
is the range of unknowns and your suppositions and the range of assumptions
that's what they are their suppositions because the bill does not bake in
your conclusions and your thoughts and turn them into actual firm commitments
the worst of those is that we do not know if in fact the solution of admin data first
is ultimately in fact cheaper than running a full field enumeration census
I want you to really think about what your role is do you claim to be competent in assessing the quality
that will arise from an admin data first approach I hope the answer is at least discomfort
through to know because there are plenty of submitters that are suggesting they know better
you've got to make a decision on what you are well equipped to do
leave the stats problems to the experts leave the admin data problems to the experts
you are governors first and foremost the bill in its current form does not
provide the governance protections that a future official statistics system needs
in fact it actually erodes what protections we do currently have
I tell my kids that intelligence is not what you know it's what you do when you don't know
and it is now your judgment as governors that we are calling upon where is your independent advice
beyond what the submitters are sharing with you from our expertise we don't have all the
information that we need to provide you with the best independent advice
we cannot offer you the certainty that you need to make the changes proposed in this bill
and I hope I've left time for questions sir
well thank you very much members
you look at um
thought provoking what you said I'm going to go to Mr Calpates
thanks very much chair and thanks very much Jonathan it was definitely thought
provoking you make the comment and you emphasize the point about uh going to a data
admin led rather in the long term what in your mind is that long term
it's a point way off after we've proven it's viable
so okay so you don't have in your mind how long do you think it will take New Zealand to get to that
point the amount of time that it will take will depend on the amount of energy that goes into
improving the admin data systems across government a program of work that currently doesn't exist
across government I mean it will depend on improved governance both by parliament and
I suspect officials that doesn't currently exist there are solutions I believe to almost every
problem but we do not have a work program and to estimate when that is coming until such time as
you have the whole list of requirements in front of you is an exercise in foolishness and I so I'm
not going to answer your question with a firm date and I believe it can't be answered thank you
um Dr Gottfried the um you've raised it in an early estimate of race as well
about the quality of the admin data and whether it's actually relevant and the ability of the
chief statistician to be able to acquire data in a form that he currently will see whoever it may be
needs it to be so that it can be used to provide information that the the chief
statisticians required to do did your did your panel look at that um and I was just
testing you know trying to get your view on whether the bill on your view has enough
provides chief statistician with enough authority to require information we heard like
for inland revenue records that type of stuff can require government agencies to provide the
data in a form that is readily available and usable by by Statistics New Zealand have you
had a look at that sort of element so the the answer is in theory it sort of attempts to
but theory and practice are very very different beasts if the chief statistician the government
statistician was to say to the commissioner of iard we want occupations how long will it be until
the commissioner actually changes things and occupation is collected and filters through
what compromises in the meantime does that lead to so uh there's there's an element of feasibility
there's not an element of certainty and when you the quality relies on certainty not on
yeah we can do that it's uh we will do that it is happening so the the bill doesn't well
there's the gray area statistician may say what they want but they can be blocked either through
funding or whatever or because it's impossible with an iard to do it or a lack of willingness
although it could not be may not be expressed by a lack of willingness that maybe they're just
you don't do the project if you're sitting in iard that's what you'll find is there's plenty
of ways that bureaucrats can find a way to drag the chain yeah as we all know um so your if you
look at the number of stats question i forget how many questions in a census just forget them i'm
thinking it's 300 or something i don't know i'm looking around the room no anyone got an idea
how many questions in a in a census but 25 it's more than that isn't it 25 so the 25 questions
that are in a census have did your panel look at those and get down to a level of saying of those
25 with the available admin data that we know is available what sort of proportion this sounds like
a subjective question but it is i think stats NZ has uh and would have an updated version of the
answer to that question right and certainly not full coverage number one but do you have a quality
in answering the quantity of questions uh is quite valid you have to also say to what quality do we
have uh admin data for each of those questions and uh almost across the board the admin data was
um not a a hope that you would want to book uh you know bet your house on right okay so and
and the you talked about the the idea that the statistician can request from other agencies
but when upgrades happen in other um database systems across government you know where's
the oversight that says you can't get rid of these three things because they're already
baked into what the government statistician expects from us and they will be collected in
exactly the same way ethnicity is a lovely example of how badly you can do it in in a million ways
right hey very helpful this morning thank you for your time uh doctor godfrey very good
right now we're going on to um
um
who's next week uh all right okay uh see you mean i'm more i think it's correct yes kiora
yeah good morning so hopefully i've pronounced your name correctly but we've got 10 minutes with you
we've um uh we're sorry we've got five minutes with you we have read your submission so you
don't perhaps just highlight the key thank you very much kiora tato um i will be speaking a little
more about my concerns about the bills implications for asian communities
as an independent researcher and advocate on asian issues though my full submission echoes
concerns of many of the other submitters um in my professional view as a data analyst and
regular census and idi data user um abandoning the full enumeration census in 2028 will
fundamentally damage the quality of the data that the government and asian communities rely
on to plan for anything practical at all to do with our communities from health services voter
engagement any kind of investment really specifically due to the poor quality and
coverage of detailed asian ethnic data in the admin data as as often just inferred we are
risking knowing less and less about a population that's getting bigger and bigger asians are
projected to be a third of the country by 2048 and i'll explain a little bit about the level
of detailed asian ethnic group needed to understand anything to do with the communities
of the four biggest ethnic categories at what we call level one ethnic group which be the really
these umbrella categories there's european marie pacific peoples and asians well asians have the
least in common with each other internally the fifth category malar is actually the worst on
that count but of the big four asian is the biggest i guess basket case you could say um you know
asia is 60 of the global population so here we're all ancestrally from from completely different
countries really far apart with like no connection and when when asians get together in new zealand
and work on asian policy or research we're mainly just splitting the category up so we can find out
anything real about you know who's actually getting diabetes for example you know is it my
lot no it's your lot um as you go down the levels it gets more and more specific and more useful
at level two at least the chinese and indians are named but everyone else gets grouped into
these other more weird leftover umbrella categories like you know other asian which has you know the
japanese and the afghans and one group like why would you ever put those two groups together
what do they have in common you know think about it i can't think of anything it's not until you
get to level three ethnic categories that you get the gold it's the actual named ethnic group
split up for all the asians beyond the chinese and indians and that's a third of all asians
and growing who are not chinese or indian that's not a small group right it's 400 000 people right
now and that's going to be ballpark 850 000 by 2048 under stats new zealand projections
it's a big group and you but you need level three even to to see the ethnicities of that group
you need level three even to see the filipinos it's the third largest asian ethnic group
are well over a hundred thousand people that's you know two whole electorates with the filipinos
just to sharpen your minds and if you don't have a census you won't even know where they are
reliably uh because the only reliable high quality source for the level three ethnic group that gold
standard ethnic level for for asians that can be cross tabulated with with crucial social data is
you guessed it it's the census admin data just can't build that gap right now it links in data
from the census for that when you're when you're in the ide trying to do a project admin data has
has two massive problems for level three asian ethnic group and also frankly for level two and
one depending on what you want to know firstly quality is bad and secondly coverage is bad
quality is bad as as other submitters have spoken of because of inconsistent collection
it's it's practically impossible for the vast national landscape of fragmented public services
to consistently collect ethnic data at that level of detail you know on the front line
it's not their priority especially through constant waves of public sector reform with
with each new government to a quality that can stand alone without cross cross referencing to
the census you know when the ide we have we have admin data it's great you know census data has to be
there and also survey data that's like three-legged store if you take one out it just kind of falls
over becomes recursive and there's no there's no backstop meanwhile data coverage is particularly
bad for asians because asian new migrants use public services less than other people
for lots of reasons like in the in eligibility under their visa conditions or language and
cultural barriers and also the healthy migrant effect less likely to need certain services
straight away and this actually affects the fastest growing asian subgroups the most because
they're the newest so you had that conundrum of data getting worse for the groups changing the most
quickly that you already knew the least about within the admin data system the covered vaccination
drive is a good example of that it showed a massive scale of the admin data undercount for
some asian subgroups who were racking up like 110 vaccination rates in the health service
user data not because we're such high achievers but because there's a huge slice of the
communities who are just not on the books so you can't use those books to count us you know why
would you do that and without the census you lose the most crucial and reliable method for that count
and yes the last two senses were badly done and as Len Cook points out it's not because the
fundamental method of a full enumeration census is bad it's literally the the best and simplest
way to do it and some would say the most cost-effective in conclusion I strongly urge the
committee to not progress this bill until an independent expert of valuation has been carried
out on the proposed option including its impact on asian communities because we are a part of this
country we're not a we're not a small group and we do have the right to be counted accurately to be
seen to be visible thank you. One question from Camilla Bitt Village. Thank you thanks for your
submission and I think you've raised some really excellent points that we'll need to consider I
just wanted to go back in I know a number of senators have talked about this independent review
how would you envisage that that would work from a practical sense in terms of this the stage that
the bill is at at the moment is it something that you think could happen in conjunction with
the examination of the bill or is it a proposal to kind of put the brakes on on this happening
at all I just wanted to ask how you saw that progressing. Well ideally yes I would like
personally I prefer the brakes to be put on completely because as other senators have said
I don't think this bill is fit for purpose I don't think the approach is fit for purpose
I think it's a really really terrible idea for basically all the same reasons that every
you know qualified expert data person has said to you today if it's a matter of procedure
do whatever you can to to delay and to consider the expert technical advice
to to see what can be done to stop what is I see it as a sort of a slow motion disaster
waiting to happen by 2028 otherwise. All right thank you for your submission and
understand the importance for the Asian community thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Right now we've got Professor Heslett, nice to see you again. Well thank you for
putting up with me again. Yeah unfortunately I only got five minutes for you this morning
so we've never seen your submission. Okay and first comment I'd make is that I wrote an article
with George Sieber in the conversation which might make supplementary reading. George is the
Foundation Professional Statistics at Auckland University and I would like to just emphasize
initially that the important thing I think that you I would strongly recommend you do from a
professional point of view is to organize and have an independent review and I think that
should happen before this bill proceeds further. Now I'm a little unusual I've worked in universities
for 40 years but I've spent a lot of time working in government statistics departments
a couple of dozen internationally and in many of them although they're in third world countries
because I've been working for the United Nations response rates for the census are 99% plus and for
surveys very similar and you need to ask yourselves why it is it's falling here and it's really to do
with the fact that data collection needs to be followed up by policies that support people
in a way that makes them feel that their data collection has been useful. So that's not
my responsibility. I'm going to talk about the merits not about the merits because you've got a lot
of people talking about the merits I'm going to talk about the viability I'm going to make some
comments from the engine room because in those 20 countries what I've worked on is census and
administrative data and survey data and I think there are technical aspects of what you're
proposing that's from the discussion this morning are not properly understood. So first of all
the IDI it consists principally of census data with additional data added on administrative data
but that administrative data is not available for everybody from the census. That problem will not
go away if you remove the census what you're going to find is you've got an incomplete
what Stats New Zealand call a spine but I prefer if it were a census to call it a backbone
it's going to be incomplete because you're putting it together from multiple data sources that don't
match now people have been talking about how variables like ethnicity don't match you can't even match
people you can't even get one person's record to match in one administrative database with another
perfectly it just doesn't happen there's a lot of work done on on statistical linkage
and that statistical linkage introduces errors into the database that make it difficult to
use for analysis further even if that were complete under some administrative first arrangement
with no proper sensors I must add that what proposes not a census under any definition
it's also not official statistics under any international definition it's going to be a
major downgrade at New Zealand status in the statistical community so that said what have we
got we've got surveys and we've got a backbone if the backbone with the census great but if the
best we can do but if the backbone is a collection of administrative databases that don't fit
together properly and they won't then what we have is a poor spine Stats New Zealand call
it's not properly functional secondly when people talk about these surveys what they're talking about
is small groups but you need a survey for every small group and I can tell you the list of small
groups is very long and you won't be able to do something for everybody further when you do that
you've got now got data which is survey data which you need to amalgamate with what might be a
complete data set let's pretend it's a census for the moment only some records can be put there
people talk about this hundred thousand dollars and hundred thousand people and two and two and
fifty thousand people but there's actually four five million people this is only going to be available
for a very small number of them there are statistical techniques which I've worked on for the last 20
years that attempt to construct what construct databases from this or data from this which
is not useful at an individual or household level it's only useful in aggregate and so what comes
back to is that you talk about this this admin data it's all right we'll just add surveys no it
isn't all right it's not going to work it's not going to work at all well so I don't think what
you've got is statistically viable I'm talking as a methodologist here of 20 years experience I don't
think you've got anybody presenting to parliament today who's got anywhere near my experience in
the engine and I'm telling you I'm advising you don't do it
um the future census independent evaluation power which Jonathan chaired
has provided some very useful information but their terms of reference only allowed them
to consider administrative data first options I'll say that again they were only allowed to
consider administrative data first options why who decided this is somebody mysterious that we don't
know who's decided for reasons that are incomprehensible to me put forward a proposal that is
largely untested it's untried it's unprecedented and it's premature
why and I'd reiterate Jonathan's point about governance
I understand that you're responsible for governance but please take advice because you're not capable
of understanding the technical parts of this and I certainly can't cover it in five minutes
now I'd just like to comment on something that has come up it's just actually a statistic
so people are talking about you know families and households and how they like how well that is
actually being produced or could be produced under a administrative census I quote the document I
mentioned last time creating household and family information from administrative data progress
limitation next census published by stats New Zealand in March 2026 now I think stats New
Zealand are doing a very good job in the circumstances but they've been given an
impossible task and it's time that a government statistician was appointed who actually
had the necessary experience in official statistics could we stop appointing generic
managers to the job please that's why things blew out in 2018 and 23 the people appointed
were generic managers they possibly also weren't good at listening because there's expertise in
stats New Zealand and certainly used to be that could be made great use of if the structure will
right all right so this is the report in the report and you might think I'm cherry picking and
perhaps I am but let's think about the number of households that are correctly allocated now by
correctly I mean this is a comparison between administrative data but administrative data in
2023 and the 2023 census so what percentage of households do you think they got exactly right
in terms of composition what would you find acceptable because the answer is just under 50
so 50 percent of households are not correctly structured in the administrative data through
any mechanism that stats New Zealand can think up and they they've worked magic let me tell you
but you know magical thinking is not going to get us there 50 less than 50 percent
it horrifying and on this you plan to you plan to base major financial social decisions
I can only describe it as unwise thank you hey thank you professor unfortunately we run out of time
but we heard quick question and we've heard a lot about um all for us to do get independent
advice um in terms of would you imagine that that comes from New Zealand or do you think this needs
to be well I think you need to definitely need some international because because nobody's done it
yeah and that you know I say that and you think oh you're maybe but you know I think nobody's done
it because they've started off it's been cooked pointed out um and abandoned the idea because
it doesn't work well and I think that if you're going to continue down this track could you
please have a plan B all right thank you thank you again for um pointing out to the committee and
passing on your views right now um we will move on cheers thank you very much for um
allowing me to come and speak to you I'm not going to go on about my submission because
I know you've all read it closely um the there's about three points I want to make firstly my own
experience I've used census data since about 1982 I've used census data that was collected in the
19th century and census data that's been collected in the 21st century so I know very well now the
census has developed I know how it's articulated with administrative data and I've used lots of
administrative data sets from building consents through to benefit data through to um data around
health and service consumption a whole range of things the critical issue about the census
is it's not a census of population it's a census of population and dwellings and why is it I think
that you know Mr O'Connor you brought this up previously um why did dwellings matter it's not
because dwellings matter in themselves although they are a critical infrastructure in New Zealand
that unlike ice cream if we change from strawberry to raspberry we can do it quickly we can't do
that with housing quickly but it's because it's a mechanism that you understand how families are
forming who makes up families and who can consume we often talk about demographics and population
and really it's about what do our families and our households look like some of which are one
person and that's the unit which is the social and economic driver in any society in any economy
the great power of the census in one place it matches those relationships immediately in one
data point at one moment in time we have lots of data sets which we are argued are going to be able
to be matched I spent an awful lot of time matching data sets from consents to valuation data to
data household data and so forth and I can tell you it is a tedious but also very difficult and
expensive job my view about this proposal is that it not only downgrades what we have relative to the
census population and dwellings but it is going to be more expensive the promises that are made
completely undemonstrated and there are claims about this being something that's happening overseas
a lot actually overseas are very very different including Britain where they have now recommitted
to the census after five years of very close analysis of what administrative data can do
people have talked about administrative data coverage I've used a lot of administrative data
in evaluation my concern is not just matter of coverage that's certainly important in terms of
our whole population but it's also the accuracy I myself had two unique identifiers in the health
system because someone put in a K on one record and a C on another took me a wee while to sort that
up but I in the time didn't impose too much I hope on the health system addresses are almost
impossible to verify and people within those addresses are also many people use them as post
response because they have to for banking reasons for benefit reasons a whole number of reasons
there's not just about coverage it's also about accuracy that's not just about ethnic categorization
identification all of those are very important but it's at the very core of what we do so I
would really advise that we put the brakes on this think very carefully because my prediction is
you'll get less and or cost you more it'll be misleading both in terms of our understanding
of our community but misleading in terms of policy right thank you I've just got one brief
question for Mr. O'Connor but the difference between a household do you talk to our own
men to a household yes are they different well they are and they aren't if you've got people
living in a dwelling those that live in that dwelling are a household if you've got it but you
can have a dwelling with no one living in there's about a hundred thousand of those dwellings so we
do actually need to know and understand both of course our household that may be made up of many
things of different family types and understanding that is really important and one of the things you
hear I hear as a housing researcher people say oh what's the number of dwellings we've got a
house and keep up with population it's not population growth that matters does matter but
that's not the core thing it's how households form that matter so we should be thinking about
household and making sure we understand who's in them and under what circumstances know where do we
know how people access through either rent or home ownership or other forms hey thank
you very much okay okay right the reason that's okay good morning um council trade
unions sundry and check hopefully
good morning nice to see you nice to see you yeah good morning
kia ora toto nami inui uh i'm sandal gray and beside me is jack foster i'm the president of the
council of trade unions and we are really grateful for this time with the justice committee to talk
about this bill i do want to open up by saying our views will reiterate those of many of the
submitters you've heard and that we think are the bill before you sets out generational change to
the structure of census that could be very harmful to a whole range of organizations and we need
to think about this and put it under further scrutiny and why do i mean that it's going to be
harmful for a whole range of organizations will we as the council of trade union use census data
to understand employment occupations income across different parts of the population and we use it
often when we are engaging in democratic activities such as this presenting to select committees
and if there is a change in that data and a degradation of that data we will not be able
to participate as fully in democratic processes because that information will not be readily
available but we are not the only civil society organization that uses census data to make sure
that we're advancing the needs of working people of communities of iwi hapu so we do urge you to
think about the impact more broadly on those of us who engage in democratic moments such as select
committees in writing reports and engaging in the democratic conversation but also we are very
concerned that what this bill in its current form would do is put blinkers on the information you
as politicians that the house of representatives would have put blinkers on the whole of government
because the information has not yet been shown that it will be full enough or full-sum enough
and we don't think any government should have blinkers on when making decisions you need the
best information and data you can get so we think it is critical to make sure there's
thorough scrutiny on this bill a thorough scrutiny of the likely impacts on democratic
decision making and on democratic engagement but for a little bit more detail of some of the
concerns i'm going to hack to jack thank you Sandra and thank you committee good to be in front of
you today so let's please shout out concerns a little bit further and you'll see that they
resonate with many of the statistical experts that you've spoken to which we're not statistical
experts but we are users of census data so we're not necessarily opposed to updating the way
that data is collected but the the key is that we need to make sure that the data is of high
enough quality as reliable as consistent with our longitudinal time series and so on
and we know that concerns have been flagged throughout this process by statistics New
Zealand by the future census independent evaluation panel by independent experts
regarding among other things the quality the comparability the granularity of administrative
data and particularly concerns raised for particular groups such as Maori Pacifica
disabled people and rainbow people so just a couple of examples to pick that out so
it's acknowledged in the regulatory impact statement that there will be a reduction in data
quality in the next five to ten years in some areas if the proposed changes go ahead so that in
itself is um is of concern however um of even greatest concern is that we've not been able
to find in the documentation accompanying the bill a detailed analysis of the specific data that
would be affected the level at which it would be affected and how this could realistically
be mitigated so we think these kinds of questions really need to be addressed before
um government would move ahead with such a large change to the most important
data collection process in the country another point of concern and this kind of goes
um more towards uh lawmaking practice is that it doesn't appear that a full regulatory impact
statement was prepared for this bill so the the RIS that's linked to online um from the from the
bill is dated 28 of April 2025 and is explicitly flagged as an interim regulatory impact statement
so there are multiple unanswered and or only partially answered questions in that interim RIS
that we would expect as a matter of um sound lawmaking process to be fleshed out before a
final decision was made these include things such as the data quality that can be realistically
achieved the variables not well represented in administrative data the financial costs of improving
administrative data to a sufficient level and you've heard from um statistics experts that
it's likely that would be extremely costly um and also the potential project management risks
associated with such a major structural change we don't have confidence that um such a large
change would be able to be managed within the short timeframes that there are available um
particularly um bearing in mind the challenges of previous censuses um so given these uncertainties
and the the lack of some thorough um thorough processes in the development of this legislation
our recommendation like many others is to pause this legislation until an independent review
of the proposed changes and the applications has been conducted and importantly has been made
publicly available um for comment so you've got the the future um independent um census um panel
could be for example recommissioned to provide such a review um the review should consider
and report on data quality and comparability issues for all questions all census questions
and population groups we need that kind of granular analysis of the potential implications
we should outline options for mitigating potential negative implications and the realistic
costs associated with doing so so to to finish up um now view the census is far too important
to risk moving ahead with a substandard reform and we we need to um do this properly thank you very
much thank you do you want a question from a question village thank you thanks very much
for your submission and for appearing in front of us today I know that the union movement has
been concerned around myths and disinformation and one of the aspects of the current census
and the way it's compiled is um engagement with official uh government um mandated people and
providing that information do you have any reflections on um on that aspect of of data
collection or or how that might be addressed in an either administrative data collection or in
a more uh border census collection thank you thanks um that's a really good question and
quite a difficult one so we acknowledge that there are um increasing challenges that officials
are facing in collecting uh important data and this is that's not just in the census but that
goes to many um important um surveys that statistics New Zealand does one of the most
important from our perspective is the household labor force survey which has seen declining response
rates and statistics New Zealand have had to make the decision to cancel certain um additional
surveys that are attached to the hlfs because of declining response rates so that's a real a
real problem it's not unique to New Zealand we understand it's um it's common around the
developed world um the problem is yeah multifaceted we don't have all the answers but I would
say that um a lot of the problems go to to structural issues of um poverty inequality
declining trust in government among certain communities the um the answer to that is not
to lower our standards around um what kind of data we can collect it's to address those
structural problems in our society um if you've got people who don't trust government
officials that's often because they're from marginalized communities um and so addressing
those root causes is is the real challenge not easy of course but um we should be realistic
about what's involved all right hey thank you very much to both of you for presenting this morning
that's uh good to hear from you thank you we're going to go to the uh New Zealand Law Society
who are sitting on the line
people can see you right good morning um nice to have you we've got 10 minutes with you we're
running a little bit behind schedule but the floor is yours we've read your submission
well good morning my name is brice liall i'm a barrister but appear today as a member of the
law society's public law committee um i was to appear with mr fletcher who's now been unable to attend
he was going to address in particular the parts of the submission addressed to the process for
amendments of constitutional significance and the lack of a transitional boundary review so
i'm happy to try to address any questions that may arise on those topics but um it might be that
the law society files a supplementary submission to address any questions that arise if i'm
not able to do so um as you said the law society filed a submission dated the 15th
of April 2026 addressed to both bills and that's what i'll briefly speak to today
I mean broadly the law society supports any measures which ensure more reliable and accurate
census data can be gathered and used for electoral purposes however the law society is concerned
that the bills and the policy process behind them in particular haven't meaningfully engaged with
key constitutional issues which arise to address the law society's concerns further policy workers
needed before the bills proceed if they are to proceed including allowance of meaningful public
consultation on the proposals and meaningful engagement with Māori um taking the issues that
we've addressed in our submission one at a time I'll speak to four points over the next couple
of minutes the first is the policy process for amendments of constitutional significance
and the lack of public consultation those inconsistencies with the principles of
te tititi hawaitangi and finally the decision not to want to take a transitional boundary review
the first of those the electoral act provides for the calculation of electoral districts
and requires the review after each periodical census that helps to ensure New Zealand's
electoral districts continue to have roughly equal numbers of people and consequently
equal representation among electors now the the mechanical parts of that act which allow for
this are reserve provisions under section 268 of the electoral act recognizing the important
constitutional role that those provisions play in our democratic arrangements the law
society's position is that any proposals to amend those reserve provisions should also be
considered as inherently constitutional and that any amendment should only be made following
gathering and consideration of evidence to show the proposed changes are appropriate and necessary
to achieve the underlying policy objective should require meaningful and robust consultation with
the public and with Māori where the changes and gauge obligations under te tititi hawaitangi
the treaty and should involve careful consideration of the costs and benefits of such amendments
and the concern really for the law society is that on the materials received so far we do not
have evidence of a robust process addressed to those factors that flows into my second point
that no public consultation was undertaken in relation to the changes in the electoral bill
despite it obviously addressing the amendments to entrenched provisions of constitutional significance
in particular and we do set out some further considerations but in particular this has meant
that members of the public have had no opportunity to offer alternative suggestions for when boundary
reviews should occur and there's been no education function served for those members of the public
about how these provisions work and how that relates to the constitutional arrangements of Aotearoa
the law society is concerned that the amendments in the electoral bill may impact not only the
legitimacy of representation but also it's perceived legitimacy and that goes hand in hand with
those legislative issues that are flagged while these bills did receive cross-party support during
the first reading that should not be considered a substitute for a meaningful public engagement
and consultation process particularly given that cross-party support was only sought after
key policy decisions had been taken
moving to the issues concerning inconsistency with the principles of te tiriti o waitangi
and this is at 2.11 of the law society's submission officials have identified that the
amendments are likely to be of interest to Māori both because of the calculation of the Māori
electoral population directly influences the number of reserved seats for Māori
and that they have identified that the amendments are likely to engage the crown's obligations
under te tiriti o waitangi and its principles as the inability to have a boundary review ahead of
the 2029 general election will impact the proportionality of representation and the size
number and boundaries of Māori electoral districts and despite that no consultation has
been undertaken with Māori on the electoral bill acknowledging that it does appear some
limited consultation has been undertaken on the other bill that we're addressing today
the law society would urge the select committee to seek advice from officials on this matter
and to ensure that any resulting legislation is consistent with te tiriti o waitangi and its
principles the final matter the law society wishes to address today this is 2.14 of the
submission is that the electoral bill doesn't provide for a transitional boundary review
meaning electoral boundaries will not be withdrawn ahead of the 2029 general election
that decision appears to have been taken despite officials confirming that transitional review was
the preferred approach that a review would ultimately increase the legitimacy of representation
in 2029 and it would allow for Māori population to be recalculated ahead of the 2029 general
election it's unclear to the law society why the decision has been made to proceed with
the minister's preferred option despite their concerns raised by officials
so in conclusion the committee in the law society's view should seek further advice to
ensure any changes particularly on the entrenched electoral provisions have public support
and are treaty consistent and if the bills proceed the relationship between the two
bills should be clearly explained to the public to make sure that they're properly informed
about what these changes mean for New Zealand's electoral arrangements
that's my window of view all right hey well thank you thank you for a stealing job
on behalf of your colleague as well we'll certainly be asking about 2.14 that you refer to
around the 29 electoral boundaries for Māori but thank you I think
okay hey thank you very much Mr Lyle for your contribution this morning very
very much appreciate that right now we're going to the New Zealand College of Public Health Medicine
and I think there you are Vanessa nice to see you are you on your own I thought you were
having someone else as well Professor Sue Collin is here as president of the college and he'll
start okay we've all read your submissions I've just reiterated to you one the committee has read
submissions right so um allowing us some time to answer questions ask questions is actually quite important
well thank you very much Tenako to Kaatoa um I'm uh Collin Tokuita I'm president of the New
Zealand College of Public Health Medicine the college is a professional body of public health medicine
specialists public health medicine is that branch of medical practice dedicated to improving
population health preventing disease and injury and advocating for measures to improve health
and well-being why are we interested in this bill we provide information advice
to a variety of stakeholders based on census data we provide evidence and information to all
manner of people who are involved in improving population health I've been playing around with
admin data for near 40 years and I can tell you I have little confidence in our admin data systems
they're not designed for this purpose some are better than others no doubt to speak further to
our submission I'm going to ask my colleague Vanessa Selec to expand on a few points thank
you very much thanks Colin and thanks so much to the committee for providing us with the opportunity
to speak in brief we're extremely concerned about the pro proposed shift away from a full field
enumeration survey to an admin first approach we've got three main concerns one inadequate review
the proposal represents a major change in methodology of a core government function
such a major change shouldn't be undertaken without genuinely independent and robust review
reviewers should have the freedom to recommend a range of options including retaining and
improving the full enumeration survey the reviewers should include national and international
experts people with expertise at Māori Pacific data government data sovereignty
as well as health sector and other key government users of health data
of census data the findings of the review should be clearly incorporated in any subsequent proposal
regarding the future of the census two inadequate testing of the replacement the proposed replacement
has not yet been fully detailed and has not yet been tested to ascertain whether it will be fit
for purpose a decision to discontinue the full field enumeration survey would be premature
until we know that its replacement will be suitable this is particularly important given that the only
countries that have moved to an admin first approach are those with key prerequisites a
personal identification system for the whole population and reliable population and address
registers that we simply don't have in place here in New Zealand thirdly inadequate economic
considerations one of the major reasons for proposing to discontinue the full field
enumeration survey is its cost it's simply not possible to assess the economic impact of the proposal
because it's unclear what the cost or the quality of the replacement will be furthermore if there's a
reduction in the quality of census data there will there is no consideration of the economic
implication of decisions made on poorer quality data in summary we strongly oppose the oppose
in the in the bill we think that the proposals premature because it hasn't been adequately
reviewed we don't know if the replacement will be fit for purpose what it will cost what the quality
of the data will be and we don't know what the economic implications will be if data quality
and decisions based on the data are compromised thanks so much for your time and we'd welcome
your questions thank you one from camilla village thank you both very much for your submission
your written submission I just had a question in terms of the changes which obviously you've outlined
the concerns that you have around it do you think that this these changes could
have the ability to impact on negatively on health outcomes if implemented
miss absolutely because the decisions that we that we make and that well I can speak to the
health system because that's what that we're unfamiliar the decisions about funding are based
on our populations so fundamentally if we don't know who the population is we don't know how to
allocate resources appropriately the talk about providing alternatives such as admin first approaches
ignore the fact that we ultimately need a a robust denominator we need to know everyone
who's there not just the people who are already accessing the service and that's the fundamental
problem with an admin first approach it relies on accessing health and other systems in order for
people to be counted so therefore we're actually not able to make efficient uses of our scarce
resources because we don't properly know who is actually who who who are actually supposed to
be serving can you take that that comment down to another level Vanessa because obviously it's
pretty easy to work out what the population is on any given day with admin data already
available so you know the total population I presume what you're talking about is disaggregating it
into ethnic groupings age groupings whatever because they'll have different health profiles I
presume that's the case that's right yeah because you need to have that detail to be able to you
know determine you know what the funding for specific services the funding for specific services
and locations the funding the funding for particular types of people so yeah it is about that
it isn't just the total it's the disaggregation at an accurate level so that you can you know
you're ensuring that people aren't missing out but working back upwards because presumably I don't
know what proportionate population end up going through some form of medical assistance or having
a medical doctor or whatever I presume the coverage is very high you you and I say you the
health health industry if I can put it that way including health New Zealand whatever doctors
there's plenty of research of Ryan health all that sort of stuff you actually are the guardians of
the data at a primary level which can obviously goes up to health New Zealand they do a lot of
analytical work Auckland University does data craft analytics do a lot of work so don't you
aren't you already capturing a lot of that data which is actually a lot more granular than what you
get out of 30 odd questions in the census yeah and actually what we the thing is is what's
previously been described is that we need a stem we need a spine we need a backbone and that's
the problem that we have because everything gets referred to the spine and if ultimately the backbone
of your data system which is what is currently in place with our full field enumeration system
is taken away we're left with something that is cobbled together and whilst absolutely we are
doing everything we can with the data that we already have available the issue is that
those departments even the health department you know we have a single identifier we have a
national health identifier and even within the health system having a single having and having
a single identifier it still means we still have issues with linking data across different data
sets and different data services another challenge is that the data are being collected in a way
that's not actually for the what we would call a secondary use in the situation so the people
that are collecting the data the doctors the nurses the hospital administrative people
their focus is on delivering health care services to the patients that are sitting in front of them
their focus isn't on directly around actually the funding important funding decisions that people
like yourself are making in terms of allocation of funding so there's a real disconnect well there
can be a disconnect between the the data that's collected at the front front line for operational
purposes and the data that's needed for planning purposes and that's why the census is so important
in its current format because it does that in a way that is the most rigorous form we regarded as
a gold standard in terms of actually collecting that backbone and that's why it's used as the backbone
right and i just had mr chairman we're not guardians of the data we're users of the data
that is not our responsibility and the various admin data sets are governed and owned by various
entities and agencies we are not the guardians we're users like a whole lot of other people and
this is why we're concerned about the changes that are being proposed all right hey well thank you
sir collin and venezia for your contribution this morning although we did now just moved into
the afternoon but thank you very much right now we're going to um who are we going to do now
hello dr grant dr grant uh david son that's you yeah you saw you come in
hey gary thank you and thanks for your time i'm i'm not here to speak to you as a statistician
i'm here to represent the people furthest from wellington which is the 20 of new zealanders who
are living and working in rural and remote areas throughout the country and producing 80 percent
of our export earnings through agricultural tourism in other areas but who have the poorest
health outcomes of anyone in the country and we have only been able to determine that recently
and you're welcome to have our rural health snapshot i bought copies for you all that has
only been available through the ability to use census data over the last two cents
i think you sent it to every mp didn't i did send it to every mp thank you for remembering that andrew
what i want to focus on today you've read my um
our submission so far but some of the statistics that we've been able to pull together you know
suicide rates 64 percent higher than urban rates mortality rates 2.5 times higher much higher
smoking rates lower immunization rates fewer formal qualifications and lower incomes making
it hard for rural students to pursue health careers if we can't have those statistics
readily at hand and compare then those rural communities are going to be even
worsely affected in the future i was interested in your comment andrew that you could
easily achieve population data on any other week that's that's complete rubbish the stats
new zealand estimate that the administrative um uh methodologies will underreport by 10 to 15
percent and that will be worse in rural areas not everyone is has got an mh i number not
there is a large percentage of unenrolled patients especially in rural and remote areas
so we've looked at the um the bill in front of us and we focused on whether that has been viewed
through a rural lens which is called rural proofing and mpi says that all bill should
and policymakers should look at uh rural proofing their policies there was no consultation with
rural people and there were no experts of rural health in any of the advisory panels that we've
looked at um the geographical classification for health of which all of our data is based on
which was only developed in 2021 is based on the smallest stats new zealand essay one
figures and those are very small population
units and they will be uh the most impacted by the methodology that's being suggested
going forward so i'd just like to make four key points first is that rural people are a priority
population under the healthy futures priority distillation and to advocate for health and
well-being of rural new zealand is we need flexible and accurate population data the definition of
rural that has been widely accepted and adopted for health context is nuanced detailed in lines with
stats new zealand small area geographies it recognizes that health districts and local
government regions contain both urban and rural communities we need accurate information for all
rural people at the small area geography so that we have a full picture of new rural new zealand
this bill risks reducing the accuracy of this information for example while the reality has
recently been used with a new zealand health survey the sample size means that different types of
virality cannot be disaggregated and it is not possible to examine the intersections of
reality with other key characteristics such as ethnicity gender and socioeconomic deprivation
a full enumeration census fills an important role and it's thanks to existing current
census data we're able to track health outcomes which as i've said are in our health snapshot
moving to an administrative data and survey based approach will just proportionately reduce
the quality and accuracy of rural data stats new zealand indicate that the accuracy and
completeness of administrative data is lowest at the small area level since virality is defined
at the small area level that means rural communities will have the worst quality
information about themselves this will be compounded by other issues included the expected
lower quality of information about those other aspects ethnicity gender disability and other
socioeconomic characteristics the proposed surveys to fill the gap in administrative data
won't fill that gap and will provide the and provide the level of fine-drained information
that we need when taken together this means that many small rural community groups are
likely to become effectively invisible and our current data driven world a lack of accurate
information will lead to poor investment decisions and wasted resources given the proof
in health inequalities that rural people face we can't afford to ignore these people such that
their outcomes are not able to be measured so we don't believe that the rural sector or the
rural health sector in particular has been adequately consulted about the proposed changes
we've seen no examples of those groups being involved in any advisory capacity
and that needs to be rectified going forwards just want you to make to draw attention to the
fact that the current coalition government is focused on health targets and outcomes
well that may be a good thing if we because we do want improved health outcomes if we haven't
evidence base for investment and accountability for that investment then we'll be failing those
communities the outcome target focused approach means that accurate data is even more important
and the changes proposed will make rural data invisible which will be a huge disservice to
those communities in terms of focusing on the targets so in conclusion if the decision
is made to proceed with the bill in its current form you'll be making a decision that will
effectively right off the health of New Zealanders living in rural and remote communities we believe
that an independent expert review is needed before any legislative change proceeds and that
an independent assessment of the impacts of the proposed changes on rural data specifically
rural health data is undertaken thanks for your time right thank you doctor we've got a question
from Camilla village thank you um similar line of questioning to the last um submission so you've
talked about rural communities being invisible possibly if these changes go ahead and also
under written submission talks about the risks um in relation to those communities with um those
data sets not being visible um I asked a previous submitter about um the outcomes um in terms
of health um for the communities they were talking about what would you imagine could be in say 10 years
the outcomes um that we go down this path well if we can't see what's happening in those communities
through clear and accurate data then there'll be no resources directed to those communities
so the health outcomes will fall even further pines than they are at the moment that's our major fear
so the data you're getting at the moment is is that sufficient in terms of allocational resourcing
and stuff like that do you feel like the data you're getting at the moment is up to scratch
well for the first time ever the data is beginning to be up to scratch and that health
New Zealand is desegregating its major data repositories by GCH category the geographical
classification of health so we're actually getting desegregation of health data by its
rurality or urbanity if you like if there is such a word is that occurring I there's no
willingness to do it but is that occurring as a result of a question come in our senses or
is that occurring because they're using the data more more appropriately to get a better view on the
rural communities we need the census data to be able to provide the GCH classifications because of
the population distributions that is not coming out of health New Zealand or other administer
of data since it comes out of the baseline so it senses okay cool all right hey thank you
very much appreciate your time this morning thank you good right um
now are we into more or are you there with us this morning or this afternoon
now more are you there
I am sorry very good the technical side of things kilda lovely to see you now we've got um 10 minutes
with you thank you we have redraw submission thank you wonderful
my name is maria cloney I'm appearing here as a co-lead for Tengaka Kahukura though I was also a
member of the future census um independent evaluation panel last year our focus um with
Tengaka Kahukura is on rainbow communities on queer trans intersex Takatapui people people who are
mahu waka salua leua pa lopa fa fa fina a kava'ini leiti paka fa fa fina people who are non-binary
or have variations of sex characteristics um many other names of names and labels rainbow people
exist in every place and in every whanau and um but historically haven't often been visible in
official statistics here today really to talk about the importance of high quality data for our
communities and I want to ask you to delay this bill and to invest in states New Zealand to
allow them to continue a full enumeration census approach as they design future high quality approaches
we work towards an Aotearoa rainbow people grow up feeling safe valued in that they belong
in all the places where they live learn and excess healthcare and social support and we do this work
because we're not there yet this year we're acknowledging the 40th year of homosexual
law reform which was a mark of acceptance and inclusion you know a while ago back at the
time that I was in primary school um but at the same time this year we're also challenging political
attacks on transgender women and children for example in the form of a puberty blocker ban
and rhetoric about who should be allowed to play sport or use a bathroom our communities face
higher rates of violence family rejection and social marginalisation and these lead to higher
rates of suicidality and mental distress homelessness and addiction these outcomes
obviously aren't universal but as a population they're more likely and they're heightened
for people who are also experiencing racism navigating disability or marginalized in other ways
so we know this sort of thing from decades of research and from community experience but until
recently we haven't had good population level official data that meant we could compare our
population experiences with other people in New Zealand so this has meant that our health and
social disparities have been systemically under recognized in government strategies
and across health and social service systems and responses to address these are under resourced
census 2023 was the first one to include um questions around rainbow identities which came
after decades of community advocacy almost since the time of homosexual law reform um data doesn't
change much in isolation but the kind of insights we've seen already published from census 2023
could allow government agencies service providers and communities to design and resource solutions
in a way that hasn't really been possible before and that impact is especially um especially over
time you know as we see see trends trends emerge so we've seen progress but the proposal being
considered in this bill will take us backwards as others have told you as stats New Zealand has
acknowledged in their community consultation documents the shift to an admin data fair census
model will result in significantly reduced data quality for the rainbow population some insights
just won't be available especially for smaller population groups and within the wider rainbow
population part of that's because there aren't any administrative data sources um about our
identities about sexuality transgender experience or innate variations of sex characteristics
they don't exist and they're not likely to exist in the near future or potentially ever um
it's not usually reliable relevant safe or desirable to have government agencies collecting
this sort of information um you know for example I mentioned um the issue around the
puberty block abandon at the moment in a time we're seeing healthcare denied to children on
the basis of being transgender it's not surprising at all that a lot of people don't
provide accurate information about their gender to health services so um some of the markers
that we might rely on are less reliable for um transgender intersex and queer people rainbow
questions could be asked in the census attributes survey that's the proposal at the moment but the
size of that survey will mean data quality will be poor or unreliable for small population groups
or regional analysis and we essentially we won't have the um so the denominator effect we don't
we won't have those population counts of how many rainbow people there are across the country
there isn't an obvious way to mitigate the impact of this proposed change on rainbow populations
want to acknowledge stats new zealand has done wonderful work um talking to rainbow community
experts to keep this conversation going but as far as we can see there just isn't the
maths for this yet they move from complete national enumeration proposed in this bill will
just mean that we lose the level of insight that was possible um for the first time with
the 2023 census there isn't a different methodology we could use to replace that so
what's being proposed in this bill will give new zealand a worse public
stats system as we said in our submission um production of official statistics requires
investment and that's a political choice that you're um able to make so i'm asking you to make
a different choice this bill will disproportionately affect rainbow populations as well as Māori
disabled people pacific populations rural communities as we just heard and other
groups that aren't reflected reliably in admin data so i want to recommend that you delay
this change and invest further in a full enumeration approach while um building in more
sources of administrative data over time as those become more reliable um Kiota thanks for
your time welcoming any questions hey thank you Maura um very nice i've got a quick one question
from Todd Steveson thanks Maura just um and as well i suppose it's good that you were involved
in the future census independent evaluation panel i think i suppose that's that's really good
and that you've and we've got your submission you've caught up problems you were just mentioning
though an attribute survey at the moment that suggested solution from stats new zealand is
that right and do you have any details on what that might look like um my understanding of the
proposed model is that stats new zealand will um conduct an attribute survey each year so they'll
do the survey of five percent of the population whatever the proposed number is now um and my
understanding is that they'll continue to ask the question the rainbow demographic questions in
that survey so um for small amounts of the population we'll have rainbow demographic data but we won't
have there's no other way of counting um the overall population or knowing how reliable that is and
those um but that those numbers the size of that survey isn't big enough to make statistical um
valid statistical um analysis around smaller groups within the population
no good no good submission and just like the uh rural um rural one before i think yeah it's a
point well made that yeah you know these are the types of groups that will potentially be missed
out by moving to this different model so thank you thank you for your time maura uh very nice thank you
thank you right now we're going to blind citizens um i think we've got dr godfrey again and rose
welkinson oh are they should we go to the next one after the next summer right um so do should we just
pause for a moment is that what you said different perfect okay they can't just come in by phone
we're just going to have a hiatus of your beaming in we're just having tittle
issue just trying to connect our next submitter so if you're wondering what's going on that's
what we're waiting for
you
so we've got the koi two center are you with us here
oh is that you oh yeah please oh we we should sit put your hand up before please sit down
now we've got um two minutes with you him a shoe there hi how are you very good thank you um
thank you chair and thank you committee for the opportunity to speak here today on behalf of
koi two the center for informed futures i'd like to extend an apology uh from sir peter gluckman
this is a topic that he is very much passionate about and would have loved to have been here in
person to uh to converse with you um if i'm i'm going to take that you've read our submission
and i will start with what i believe is at the heart of this bill which is really um
raising a fundamental issue for what liberal democracies face which is we need the availability
of reliable trustworthy data to support long-term decision making and informed long-term decision
making and high quality data is an integral part of the liberal democracy infrastructure and
maintaining and uh maintaining public trust in an era where we have the rise of populism and
democracies around the world faltering under the pressures of misinformation and the like
for new zealand population data is being quite instrumental and particularly the census in
particular in terms of how it is underpinned quite significant and quite complex decisions
over a long period of time that not only shape the decisions that we're making today but will
have intergenerational consequences over the much longer term and these decisions require
robustness they require coverage they require credibility and they can't just be viewed as
short-term efficiency for um because it is going to have some long-term consequences if we don't
make the right decisions now in terms of um the opportunities that are ahead of us is obviously
administrative data new analytical techniques and the possibilities that AI offer and given that the
public sector is already looking at decision making using some of these tools they present a
wealth of opportunities however they are not a simple substitute for well-designed survey
based census data that we have been using for these decision makings to date and also equally
important is that trust is not going to be maintained with a really good visibility for the
public and for them to maintain confidence in how we're using these emerging techniques how
we're using admin data and how we're going to evolve the i di and the likes is also equally
important so we need a really good oversight we need mechanisms in which our public is
maintained in the journey as we transition to a new state of what we think about and what
we consider in terms of census data and the like i guess the um my closing remark and
i'm really looking forward to taking some questions if that's an option is that this is
a moment for us to proceed with caution yes there are significant opportunities that innovation
presents and there is a lot that new zealand could do in this space however is
whatever decisions we make need to be able to strengthen our long-term decision making not
weaken it and if we want to make good long-term choices on issues that fundamentally are going
to have intergenerational outcomes is we need robust trustworthy data with good oversight and
good governance otherwise we are at a point where we risk undermining the very foundations of our
democratic decision making so i'll stop there and happy to take some questions right mr. Todd
Stevens oh thanks thanks for your submission and your recommendations you've raised a few things
that are actually new that we haven't heard so i want to just ask some questions about those
yeah absolutely please do well one is this idea of a defective population register and i actually
where you talk about some of the countries that are using admin data so you
that well i'm not trying to be controversial but you're obviously talking about it like every
citizen having some kind of unique idea that then can help match data exactly is if you look at i
guess where some of the other countries have gone with that is if you've got a good um individual
level um mechanism if i dang individual i dang our population is then you can use that to build
that population level um information and database that we need to then be able to provide the
services that we need uh but however if you look at where some of the other countries are
they're much more advanced in terms of the quality and the robustness of those admin data
that they've got so they've been in a position to do that whereas we may not be there yet and we may
need to go through a period of transition in order to ensure that our admin data is of the um the
nature and the scale and the quality so that we are able to substitute to that if that is
what the decision is um further i would also say is the way we've collected our admin data
may not be the same way that others have done so there is a bit of um a journey to go through
in terms of how we bring the public up to speed in terms of what that admin data is and why we needed
yeah i think you can really identify too if we're going to do that it's probably a large public
conversation to build more trust because i think some people would be uncomfortable shall we say about
yet well they'd need to know you'd need to convince people about the that's useful
the other quick two things sorry not to dominate um but you've you've mentioned AI i think that's
kind of interesting and transparency around that if you just want to make some more comments about
how you think yeah that should be governed and then also you seem to be saying that even the current
IDI you think there should be some strengthening of um the oversight there around administrative
data if you could just talk on those two okay so i'll start with the IDI is i think if you
look at the evolution of the IDI the IDI is a really powerful tool that New Zealand has
and if you look at where probably nearly about 10 years ago it was a world-class capability
that New Zealand had and i think over time that um investment in it has deteriorated
and it would be really valuable for us to um to invest in it so that if it is going to be
the cornerstone on which so much of our public decision making is based on particularly in the
social sector is i think there is a lot that we could do to strengthen the capabilities that are
there i think that ties into the your comment on AI is there are again so many opportunities that AI
proceed and at the backbone of the AI infrastructure we need good quality training data and we need
good quality data that represents the population and particularly the underserved part of our
population which right now we don't have confidence that the admin data we've got in place is going to
be an adequate substitute for that so we do need in parallel both an AI infrastructure that supports
it so that we can really leverage the data that we've already got the data we are going to collect
and ensure we future prove the decisions we're making in such a way that we can truly leverage
leverage the capability and the investments we're putting into these things
did you just i mean my question is going to be about AI as well because i don't think that has
been discussed in detail um is that is that something that you are suggesting that we
would potentially include as part of the committee's recommendations on this bill that there needs
to be kind of mandatory transparency around when AI is being used absolutely i i think if you look at
the idea in particular there are a lot of opportunities and there's a lot of data in there
that could that is and could be used further and more in a more advanced ways than we're currently
using it however i think the challenge we've got which we've always had um and so do it's not
just unique to New Zealand it's around social license and i think if we are going to leverage
the capabilities we've already invested in and public public investments already gone into a lot of
this is greater transparency means there's going to be more uptake more voluntary hopefully more
voluntary uh sharing of information and better acknowledgement and awareness from the public
for why this is really important at the moment um if you look at the census responses or many other
things is the lack of public engagement is it's yes it means we haven't told the value proposition
of why data is so important and so instrumental to how governments make good decisions
but at the same time is we haven't actually clearly made it easy for public to engage and
see how their data is being used and how they can actually contribute to the decisions that shape the
country thank you very much no worries thank you so much for your time we short submission but
very powerful so thank you very much appreciate your time this afternoon yeah they're not available
okay so we're now going to call a hold we'll come back at one o'clock
uh so we'll back into it over the benches thank you